The Complex Hierarchical Topology of EEG Functional Connectivity
Keith Smith∗,a,b, Javier Escuderoa
aInstitute for Digital Communications, School of Engineering, University of Edinburgh, West Mains Rd, Edinburgh, EH9 3FB, UK,
e-mail: k.smith@ed.ac.uk, javier.escudero@ed.ac.uk
bAlzheimer Scotland Dementia Research Centre, University of Edinburgh, 7 George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9JZ, UK
Abstract
Background: Understanding the complex hierarchical topology of functional brain networks is a key aspect of func-
tional connectivity research. Such topics are obscured by the widespread use of sparse binary network models which are
6102 voN 9  ]CN.oib-q[  4v08610.4061:viXra
fundamentally different to the complete weighted networks derived from functional connectivity.
New Methods: We introduce two techniques to probe the hierarchical complexity of topologies. Firstly, a new metric
to measure hierarchical complexity; secondly, a Weighted Complex Hierarchy (WCH) model. To thoroughly evaluate our
techniques, we generalise sparse binary network archetypes to weighted forms and explore the main topological features
of brain networks- integration, regularity and modularity- using curves over density.
Results: By controlling the parameters of our model, the highest complexity is found to arise between a random
topology and a strict ’class-based’ topology. Further, the model has equivalent complexity to EEG phase-lag networks
at peak performance.
Comparison to existing methods: Hierarchical complexity attains greater magnitude and range of differences between
different networks than the previous commonly used complexity metric and our WCH model offers a much broader range
of network topology than the standard scale-free and small-world models at a full range of densities.
Conclusions: Our metric and model provide a rigorous characterisation of hierarchical complexity. Importantly,
our framework shows a scale of complexity arising between ’all nodes are equal’ topologies at one extreme and ’strict
class-based’ topologies at the other.
Keywords: Functional connectivity, Hierarchical complexity, Brain networks, Electroencephalogram, Network
simulation
1. Introduction concerned with understanding how the hierarchy of the
system contributes to its complexity. Here we introduce a
Graph theory is an important tool in functional con-
new metric aptly named hierarchical complexity, R, which
nectivity research for understanding the interdependent
is based on targeting the structural consistency at each
activity occurring over multivariate brain signals [1–3]. In
hierarchical level of network topology. We compare our
this setting, Complete Weighted Networks (CWNs) are
metric with network entropy [8] and find that we can of-
produced from all common recording platforms including
fer a greater magnitude and density range for establishing
the Electroencephalogram (EEG), the Magnetoencephalo-
differences in complexity of different graph topologies.
gram (MEG) and functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Alongside this, we introduce the Weighted Complex Hi-
(fMRI), where every pair of nodes in the network share a
erarchy (WCH) model which simulates hierarchical struc-
connection whose weight is the output of some connectiv-
tures of weighted networks. This model works by mod-
ity measure. Complex hierarchical structures are known to
ifying uniform random weights by addition of multiples
exist in real networks [4], including brain networks [1, 5],
of a constant, which is essentially a weighted preferential
for this reason it is important to find methods to specifi-
selection method with a highly unpredictable component
cally evaluate hierarchical complexity of network topology.
provided by the original random weights. We show that it
Here we introduce methods specific to this end.
follows very similar topological characteristics of networks
Complexity is understood neither to mean regularity,
formed from EEG phase-lag connectivity. Intrinsic to our
where obvious patterns and repetition are evident, nor
model is a strict control of weight ranges for hierarchi-
randomness, where no pattern or repetition can be estab-
cal levels which offers unprecedented ease, flexibility and
lished, but attributed to systems in which patterns are
rigour for topological comparisons in applied settings and
irregular and unpredictable such as in many real world
for simulations in technical exploration for brain network
phenomena [6]. Particularly, the brain is noted to be such
analysis. This also provides an unconvoluted alternative
a complex system [7] and this is partly attributed to its
to methods which randomise connections [9, 10] or weights
hierarchical structure [5]. Hierarchical complexity is thus
Preprint submitted to Journal of Neuroscience Methods November 10, 2016

[11] of the original network. The degree, k , of node i is defined as the number of its
i
Any rigorous evaluation of brain networks should ad- adjacent connections, which is the number of non zero en-
dress their inherent complete weighted formulation [12]. tries of the ith column of W. Then, for a simple graph,
(cid:80)n
However, the current field has largely lacked any concerted k = W . For a graph with 2m edges, the connec-
i j=1 ij
effort to build an analytical framework specifically tar- tion density, P, of a graph is P = 2m/n(n − 1).
geted at CWNs, preferring instead to manipulate the func- A CWN is represented by a symmetric adjacency ma-
tional connectivity CWNs into sparse binary form (e.g. trix with zero diagonal (no self-loops) and weights, W ∈
ij
[10, 13, 14] as well as wide-spread use of the Watts-Strogatz [0,1], elsewhere. To analyse CWNs it is beneficial to con-
[9] and Albert-Barabasi [15] models) and using the pre- vert it to simple form by binarising the adjacency matrix
existing framework built around other research areas which using a threshold, where a percentage of strongest con-
have different aims and strategies in mind [16]. In our nections are set to 1 and the remaining values set to 0.
methodological approach we propose novel generalisations This stays true to the network activity [12] whilst reducing
of pre-existing sparse binary models to CWN form and computational complexity and weight issues found with
thus allow a full density range comparison of our tech- weighted metrics [2]. Hereafter, all mathematics will refer
niques. Due to the intrinsic properties of these graph types to simple graphs.
we find minimal and maximal topologies which can help to In this section we present the contributions of this
shed light on a wide variety of topological forms and their study. We first present the hierarchical complexity metric
possible limitations [8] in a dense weighted framework. and the WCH model, which are the key novel contributions
Further, as part of our study we seek after straightfor- of this paper. Thereafter we detail revisions and clarifica-
ward metrics to evaluate other main aspects of network tion of integration and segregation as a scale evaluated by
topology for comparisons [8, 17] and, in this search, found C and scale-freeness as a factor evaluated by V . Finally,
it necessary to revise key network concepts of integration- we outline the generalisation of key network archetypes
segregation [2, 9, 18] and scale-freeness [15, 19]. We pro- to CWN form, full details of which can be found in the
vide here these revisions: i) That the clustering coefficient, supplementary material.
C, is enough to analyse the scale of integration and seg-
regation, finding it unnecessary and convoluted to use the 2.1. Hierarchical Complexity Metric
characteristic path length, L, as a measure of its opposite, The ideas of order and complexity are well known in
as generally accepted [1, 9]. ii) We provide mathematical the discussion of networks (indeed, real world networks
justification that the degree variance, V , and thus network are often called complex networks [1, 3, 22]). In math-
irregularity [20] is a strong indicator of the scale-free factor ematics, the graphs studied derive from some theoretical
of a topology. principles. These can involve set patterns, without ran-
Our study of hierarchical complexity, using a compre- dom fluctuations of connections, such as regular networks,
hensive methodological approach, provides mathematical fractal networks, star networks and grid networks. On the
quantification of the hierarchical complexity of EEG func- other hand much interest is shown in more randomly gen-
tional connectivity networks and reveals new insights into erated topologies, such as random graphs and other graphs
key aspects of network topology in general. Our model involving random processes, as these express something of
provides improved comparative abilities for future clinical the more erratic and irregular quality of connections in
and technical research. networks constructed from real world phenomena [9, 23].
However, real world phenomena differ from random pro-
cesses in that there is a clear organisational behaviour ap-
2. Network Science: Proposed methods and key
parent throughout the hierarchical structure, both within
revisions
hierarchical levels and between hierarchical levels [4, 5].
We adopt the notation in [21] so that a graph, G(V,W), Although this structure is perhaps impossible to retrace,
is a set of n nodes, V, connected according to an n × n because its formation inevitably involves many unknown
weighted adjacency matrix, W. Entry W of W corre- generative processes, we can provide methods for its anal-
ij
sponds to the weight of the connection from node i to ysis.
node j and can be zero. An unweighted graph is one in Hierarchies in networks are generally determined by
which connections are distinguished only by their existence degrees of nodes, where a small group of highly connected
or non-existence, so that, without loss of generality, all ex- nodes create a rich club [22] on the top hierarchical level
isting connections have weight 1 and non-existent connec- and nodes with generally lesser connectivity exist on a pe-
tions have weight 0. The graph is undirected if connec- ripheral lower levels. Further, it is seen that a node’s re-
tions are symmetric, which gives symmetric W. A simple lationship within the context of the network is greatly de-
graph is unweighted, undirected, with no connections from termined by the other nodes to which it is connected [24].
a node to itself and with no more than one connection be- Thus, to understand the hierarchical complexity of a net-
tween any pair of nodes. This corresponds to a graph work we propose to study the behaviour of nodes of a given
with a symmetric binary adjacency matrix with zero di- degree by looking at the degrees of nodes in their neigh-
agonal. Such graphs are easy to study and measure [16]. bourhoods. We define D as the set of degrees of a graph,
2

disorganised or more complexly organised. For example,
in Fig.1.B the two degree nodes all have the same degree
sequences- {3,4}- whereas the three degree nodes are split
into two different degree sequences- {1,2,2} and {1,1,4}-
and finally the neighbourhood degree sequences of the four
degree nodes are all different- {1,1,1,4}, {1,2,2,4} and
{2,3,3,3}. So the complexity of just the two degree nodes
is 0, the complexity of just the three degree nodes is 2((2−
1.5)2 + (1 − 1.5)2 + (2 − 3)2 + (4 − 3)2)/(4 × 3 × 3) =
5/36 and the complexity of just the four degree nodes is
(2(1 − 4/3)2 + (2 − 4/3)2 + 2((1 − 2)2 + (3 − 2)2) + 2(4 −
11/3)2 +(3−11/3)2)/(4×3×2) = (16/3)/24 = 8/36, the
complexity over all three levels being the average- 13/108.
This measure is thus minimal for graphs in which, for
each k and k(cid:48), every k-degree node is connected to exactly
the same number of k(cid:48)-degree nodes. This property, for ex-
Figure1: A.Exampleofanodedegreeneighbourhood. Hereisshown
a part of a network relating to the neighbourhood of the blue node. ample, is seen in ring lattices, and quasi-star graphs and is
The blue node has neighbourhood degree sequence {1,2,3,4,4}, i.e. close to minimal in the line graph, fractal graphs and grid
the ordered degrees of the orange nodes. Grey connections indicate
lattices. Furthermore, the degrees of random networks are
all the additional connections of the orange nodes in the network.
known to have a fairly small spread which is a factor pe-
B. Example for graph complexity. Here is shown a 20 node network
with varying ’orderedness’ at different degree levels. C. Diagram nalised by our complexity value. Thus random networks
of the construction of the WCH model. Above is the probability should obtain low values of our complexity measure. On
distribution function for a geometric distribution with p = 0.6 for
the other hand, R values of real networks are expected to
a three level hierarchy. Below is a graphic displaying the additional
be higher given the high spread and degree fluctuations
weight added between nodes in given hierarchy levels.
of those networks caused by hub nodes promoting a high
degree irregularity while the spontaneous nature of real-
G. Similar to the idea of node degree sequences [25], we
world connections should promote a high variability of the
can construct neighbourhood degree sequences, specific to
neighbourhood degree sequences.
each node in the graph. That is, for a node, i, of degree
k ∈ D we have a sequence 2.2. Weighted Complex Hierarchy Model
The foundation of our model is the random CWN model.
s = {d ,d ,,d } s.t. d ≤ d ≤ ··· ≤ d ∈ D,
i i,1 i,2 i,k i,1 i,2 i,k
The most general random network is the Erd¨os-R´enyi (E-
R) random network [23] which is formed by assigning a
where d is the degree of the jth node connected to node
i,j
probability, p, to the question of the existence or non-
i (see Fig. 1.A). For all nodes of a given degree, k, the
existence of connections on a network with n nodes. Such
corresponding neighbourhood degree sequences have equal
a construct is, in fact, an ensemble of graphs denoted
length, k.
G(n,p). A sample of this ensemble is obtained by generat-
We define the hierarchical complexity, R, of a network
ing a random value for every possible connection and ap-
as the average variance of the k-degree neighbourhood de-
plying the probability value p as a threshold to see whether
gree sequences and can be expressed as:
or not that connection should exist in our sample. The ran-
 
k (cid:32) (cid:33) dom CWN model is thus simply a symmetric matrix with
1 (cid:88) 1 (cid:88) (cid:88)
R =  (s ki(j) − µ kj)2 , zero diagonal and randomly generated values W ij ∈ [0,1]
D kr (r − 1)
k k elsewhere. If we threshold the CWN at weight T = p,
D (cid:54)=∅ j=1 i∈D
k k
(1) we recover a binary Erd¨os-R´enyi random graph from the
where D is the number of distinct degrees in the graph, D random graph ensemble G(n,p).
k
is the set of nodes of degree k, s (j) is the jth element Starting from an Erd¨os-R´enyi CWN we randomly dis-
ki
of the ith k-length sequence, µ is the mean value of el- tribute the nodes into hierarchy levels based on some dis-
kj
ement j over all k-length sequences and r is the number crete cumulative distribution function, p, by generating a
k
of nodes of degree k, which is added to the denominator random number, r, between 0 and 1 for each node and
for normalisation of hierarchy levels. putting the node in the level for which r − p is first less
Organisation of the graph at the level of k-degree nodes than 0. We then distribute ls additional weight to all
can be seen by comparing the jth elements of their neigh- connections of adjacent nodes in the lth level, for some
bourhood sequences. If all of the jth elements of all the suitably chosen s. The parameters of this model are then
sequences are equal, that is s = s for all s , s of length k, (n,s,l,p). The parameter n is the number of nodes in
i j i j
then there is a high degree of order present in the k-degree the network. The parameter s is the strength parameter,
nodes of the graph. If these sequences differ widely how- which is constant since the random generation of the ini-
ever, then it can be said that the k-degree nodes are either tial weights is enough to contribute to weight randomness.
3

The parameter l is the number of levels of the hierarchy, something which is not integrated must be segregated and
with a default setting of a random integer between 2 and vice versa. Having one metric to inform on where a net-
5. The vector p is the cumulative probability distribution work lies on that spectrum is therefore sufficient.
vector denoting the probabilities that a given node will be- Thus, here we propose C as the topological measure
long to a given level where the default, which we use here, to evaluate levels of integration (and so segregation) of a
is a geometric distribution with p = 0.6 in hierarchical given network. Firstly, we note that values of C for random
levels (0,1,2,...,l) where the nodes with highest connec- graphs and small-world graphs are often much more dis-
tivity (top hierarchical level) are at the tail end of the tinguishable than those of L [9] and it is certainly assumed
distribution. Fig. 1.C plots an example of the geometric that these graphs have very different levels of integration.
distribution for a three level hierarchy. The text inside the Secondly, since the random network is optimally integrated
box plots, above, indicates the additional weights given to and E[C ] = E[P ] [16], where P is the connection
ran ran ran
connections adjacent to nodes inside the given level. The density of the random network, then the larger the devi-
graphic below explains the additional weights provided by ation from 1 of the value γ = C/E[C ] = C/E[P ] =
ran ran
the strength parameter of connections between nodes in C/P, the more segregated is the network. We will include
different levels as well as in the same level. For example, a both L and C in our analysis in order to provide evidence
connection between a level 1 node and a level 2 node has to back the above proposal.
additional strength 3s which consists of one s provided by
the node in Level 1 and 2s provided by the node in Level 2. 2.3.2. Regularity and Scale-Freeness
At s = 0, we have the E-R random network and at s = 1 Another topological factor of small world networks is
the weights of the network are linearly separable by the hi- noted as a scale-free nature characterised by a power law
erarchical structure producing a strict ’class-based’ topol- degree distribution [28]. To understand this aspect of net-
ogy. Between these values a spontaneous ’class-influenced’ work topology another factor of network behaviour is for-
topology emerges. mulated distinguishing between ’line’ like and ’star’ like
graphs [2, 29].
2.3. Revision of concepts from network science Here, we show that characterisation of scale-freeness is
Here we present justifications for metrics as measures closely connected to the regularity of a network. Regular
of key topological factors- the global clustering coefficient, graphs have been studied for over a century [30]. They
C, for degree of segregation and the degree variance, V , are defined as graphs for which every node has the same
for irregularity, linked to scale-freeness. degree. An almost regular graph is a graph for which the
highest and lowest degree differs by only 1. Thus a highly
2.3.1. Integration-Segregation irregular graph can be thought of as any graph whose ver-
tices have a high variability. Such behaviour can be cap-
The concept of integration in brain networks is closely
tured simply by the variance of the degrees present in the
tied in to the small world phenomenon [26], where real
graph, that is
world networks are found to have an efficient ’trade off’
V = var(D), (3)
between segregative and integrative behaviours [27]. The
most widely used topological metrics in network science-
where D = {k } , is the set of node degrees on a given
i i∈V
C and the characteristic path length, L- are commonly
graph [20].
noted as measures of these quantities, respectively. Here,
For regular graphs V = 0 by definition, but more prob-
L is defined as the average of the shortest paths between
ing is necessary to distinguish high V topology. For a
each pair of nodes and C is defined as the probability that (cid:80)n
graph with degrees k = {k ,k ,...,k }, and k =
1 2 n i=1 i
a path of length 2, or triple, in the graph has a shortest
2m, on multiplying out the brackets V simplifies to
path of length 1. That is,
n (cid:18) (cid:19)2
1 (cid:88) 2m
closed triples V = − k
i
C = , (2) (n − 1) n
triples i=1
(cid:107)k(cid:107)2
where a closed triples is such that, for triple {W ,W }, = 2 − 2mP,
ik kj (n − 1)
W = 1, for i,j,k distinct.
ij
Since integration implies a non-discriminative behaviour
where P = 2m/n(n − 1) is the connection density and
in choice, we argue that the random graph ensemble [23], (cid:107)k(cid:107)2 = (cid:80)n k2, is the squared (cid:96) norm of k. This tells
2 i=1 i 2
defined by its equal probability of existent connections be-
us that V is proportional to the sum of the squares of
tween all pairs of nodes, is the most exemplary model of an the degrees of the graph, (cid:107)k(cid:107)2, and, for fixed number of
2
integrated network. Anything which deviates from equal connections, m, V in fact depends only on (cid:107)k(cid:107)2. Now,
2
probability is a discriminative factor which favours certain it is known that (cid:107)k(cid:107)2 is maximal in quasi-star graphs
2
connections or nodes over others, likely leading to more
and quasi-complete graphs [31]. Essentially, the quasi-star
segregated activity. Further, it is clear that integration
graph has a maximal number of maximum degree nodes in
and segregation are opposite ends of the same spectrum-
4

the graph for the given connection density and the quasi-
complete graph has a maximal number of isolated, or zero-
degree, nodes in the graph. This tells us that, for low P,
high V denotes the presence of a few high degree nodes
and a majority of relatively low degree nodes, i.e. scale-
free-like graphs. Thus, due to the restriction placed on
possible degree distributions by the number of edges (the
small number of edges in sparse networks means the num-
ber of high degree nodes is very limited), the irregularity
of degrees is a strong indicator of the strength of ’decay’
of the given distribution, relating to how ’scale-free’ the
graph is.
2.4. Complete Weighted Network Archetypes
In the supplementary material we detail the method
to generalise sparse binary network archetypes to CWN
form. The pre-requisit of such a generalisation is that we
require obvious higher density versions of lower density
Figure 2: A. A 12 node ring lattice of degree 6, comprising the
forms which can be arranged in adjacency matrix form three strongest weight categories of the ring lattice CWN. B. The
such that each non-zero entry, W , of the lower density quasi-star with 4 nodes of degree n − 1 and n − 4 nodes of degree
ij
4, also comprising the first four categories of the star CWN. C. The
ˆ
adjacency matrix exists as a non-zero entry, W in the
ij grid lattice weight categorisation (relating to the grey node) in a 30
higher density adjacency matrix. This is indeed the case
node network (see supplementary material). Colours of edges denote
for the Regular Ring Lattice, Star, Grid Lattice and Frac- category: black, blue, green, orange and red edges are in weight cate-
gories 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5, respectively. The increasingly lighter boundaries
tal Modular CWNs (see Fig. 2 A,B,C,D respectively). We
thus represent ’catchment’ areas around the node by increasing cat-
explain these higher and lower density forms of the bi-
egory. Centring these ’catchment’ areas around a given node gives
narised CWN in terms of weight categories where, if we the respective categorisation of edges adjacent to the new node. D.
choose an appropriate threshold, T, we can recover all Fractal modular CWN weight categorisation on 30 nodes. Edges
shown (black) are 1st weight category edges. In this instance, in-
edges in the same and all higher weight categories and
creasingly lighter background represents areas within which all pairs
none of the edges existing in all lower categories.
of nodes become connected by edges when the network is subject to
the threshold corresponding to the respectively increasing category
(see supplementary material).
3. Methods
Here we apply methods to graphs of 64 nodes, typical following elements: four metrics, R, C, V , Q characteris-
of medium density EEG. For analysis we employ connec- ing four important and distinct topological features; five
tion density thresholds at integer percentages of strongest CWN archetypal models- Random, Star, Regular Lattice,
weighted connections, rounded to the nearest whole num- Fractal Modular, Grid Lattice; the WCH model.
ber of connections. We then implement metric algorithms
on each of these binary networks and plot the obtained 3.1. Metrics
values on a curve against connection density, similar as in
In [8, 17] an ’architecture’ of network topology is pro-
e.g. [32, 33]. This generates metric curves plotted against
posed involving the three most widely studied properties
connection density which provides a detailed analysis of
of brain networks- integration (and segregation) [2, 9, 18],
the CWN topology. Other methods exist to analyse CWNs
’scale-freeness’ [15, 19] and modularity [5, 36]. For our
such as weighted metrics [11] or density integrated metrics
analysis in comparison with hierarchical complexity, R,
[34], but these metrics still give only singular values for a
we choose a straightforward metric for each of these topo-
given network which belies little of topological behaviour
logical factors- C for integration, V for scale-freeness and
at different scales of connectivity strength.
Q for modularity [36] where
For random and WCH CWNs we use sample sizes of
100 for each network and for the EEG functional connec- 1 (cid:88)(cid:18) k k (cid:19)
i j
Q = W − δ(c ,c ), (4)
tivity CWNs we have a sample size of 109 [35]. On the ij i j
2m 2m
metric curves for these we plot the median with the in- i,j
terquartile range shaded in. For ordered networks there is
where c is the module containing node i and δ() is the
i
only one network per type by definition.
Kronecker delta function. Highly efficient algorithms have
Our analytical framework is composed of a mixture
been created [37, 38] aiming to maximise the value of Q
of entirely new concepts and novel generalisations of ex-
for a given network. To compute the modularity of our
isting concepts to CWN form. It is constituted of the
networks, we use the undirected modularity function [37]
in the Brain Connectivity Toolbox [18].
5

3.2. Comparison for Hierarchical Complexity using Slepian sequences and 2Hz spectral smoothing. A
0.5Hz resolution was obtained using one second of zero
We compare our hierarchical complexity metric with
padding. We chose to analyse the matrices obtained from
a commonly used metric for analysing the entropy of the
both the coherence and the debiased Weighted Phase-Lag
network degrees [8]. This is defined using the normalised
(cid:80) Index (dWPLI) [42] to look for differences between net-
degree distribution q = k p / k p , where k is the de-
i i i j j j i
work topologies of zero and non-zero phase lag dependen-
gree of node i and p is the proportion of nodes in the
i
cies in the channels [43]. We treat the data of all tasks
graph with the same degree as node i which relates to
as a single dataset to allow for the variability of the EEG
probabilities of going to/ coming from neighbouring nodes
network topologies since we are not interested here in the
in directed graph problems. Then the entropy of graph G
tasks themselves but on the behaviour of general EEG net-
is a straightforward derivation of Shannon’s entropy equa-
works obtained from dWPLI and coherence.
tion [39] for the degrees of the graph:
n 3.5. Statistical analysis
(cid:88)
H(G) = − q log(q ). (5)
i i
Due to the polynomial formulation of the complexity
i=1
measure, producing a non-normal distribution, we com-
Thus, Network entropy encodes the eccentricity of the
pare metric distributions using the Wilcoxon rank sum
graph degrees.
test. The z-score is used to ascertain the magnitude and
direction of the relationship of the distributions.
3.3. Comparisons for the WCH model
We implement comparisons with the Watts-Strogatz
4. Results
small-world model [9] which randomly rewires a set pro-
portion of edges starting from a regular lattice. We use
4.1. Metric Comparisons
the full range of parameters for initial degree specification
Fig. 3 shows the metric curves (i.e. metric plotted
(2 up to 62) and random rewiring parameters from 0.05 in
against network density) for C, V , Q, R, L and H for
steps of 0.05 up to 0.95. For each combination of parame-
all archetypes as well as for the EEG dWPLI (red shade)
ters, 100 realisations of the model were computed and C,
and coherence (blue shade) networks. From these plots we
V , Q, and R were measured. We further compare with
see experimental evidence of maximal and minimal topolo-
Albert-Barabasi’s scale-free model [15] which begins with
gies for the given topological characteristics. These max-
a graph consisting of core of highly connected nodes to
imal and minimal topologies are explained as the curves
which the rest of the nodes are added one by one with a
whose lines are consistently lowest or highest over all densi-
set degree but paired by edges to randomly selected nodes.
ties. Fractal Modular networks (purple lines) are maximal
We use an initial number of nodes of 15 and the additional
for both C and Q (top left and centre left, respectively).
node’s degree from 3 up to 14 in order to reach larger den-
This is to be expected since the modules are complete
sities.
sub-networks with very few connections between modules,
maximising Q. Further this minimises the number of open
3.4. EEG networks
triples in the graph, maximising C, by restricting open
We use an eyes open, resting EEG data set with 64
triples to relating only to those few connections which do
nodes. We report on networks created from the beta (12.5-
extend between modules. The star CWN (orange lines)
32Hz) band using coherence and the debiased Weighted
acts as a maximal topology for V , as expected from the
Phase-Lag Index (dWPLI) in order to account for differ-
theory explained in Section 2, while being a minimal topol-
ent possible types of EEG networks while reducing redun-
ogy for L (bottom left). Regular graphs, such as the ring
dancy of similar topological forms found between the fre-
lattice network (blue lines), give 0 degree variance and hi-
quency bands (see supplementary material).
erarchical complexity, thus are minimal topologies of these
The dataset, recorded using the BCI2000 instrumenta-
features. The results of Fig. 3 for 30 node networks, found
tion system [40], was freely acquired from Physionet [35].
in the supplementary material, follow the same relation-
The signals were recorded from 64 electrodes placed in the
ships, providing evidence that these features are indepen-
main in accordance with the international 10-10 system.
dent of network size.
We took the eyes open resting state condition data, con-
Comparing the plots in Fig. 3 of C (top left) with
sisting of 1 minute of continuously streamed data which
L (bottom left) and R (centre right) with H (bottom
were partitioned into 1s epochs and averaged for each of
right), it is immediately clear that L and H show extreme
109 volunteers.
behaviour at low densities while remaining consistent at
FieldTrip [41] was used for pre-processing, frequency
higher densities. This exemplifies how these metrics are
analysis and connectivity analysis to obtain the adjacency
aimed at analysis of sparse networks, where it appears that
matrices of complete weighted networks. The 64 channels
values can take a much greater range than for higher den-
were re-referenced using an average reference, the multi-
sity networks.
taper method was implemented from 0 seconds onwards
6

To explore these comparisons further we perform sta-
tistical analysis with Wilcoxon rank sum tests on the dif-
ferences of distributions of metric values of EEG dWPLI
and E-R random networks as well as of EEG dWPLI and
EEG coherence networks (Fig 4). The results show that C
(right) and R (left) attain a greater range over edge den-
sity, P, of significant differences than their counterparts,
L and H. Particularly, R distinguishes differences from
1% up to 44% densities in the EEG dWPLI and coherence
comparison (solid blue line), whilst entropy only can dis-
tinguish differences from 1% up to 27% (solid yellow line).
Further, the z-scores indicate that in the range 1-27%, the
differences found in R are greater than those found using
H. Comparing the EEG dWPLI networks with E-R ran-
dom networks (Fig 4, left, dashed lines), both metrics find
differences at all levels, but the magnitude of difference
found by R (blue) is consistently greater than those found
by H (yellow). Thus, our metric outperforms entropy in
both magnitude and range of differences found.
Similarly, C finds a greater range and magnitude of dif-
ferences than L, Fig 4 right. In fact, C discerns differences
at all connection densities for the two comparisons, while
L fails to find differences after 62% in comparing dWPLI
and coherence networks (solid yellow line) and after 73%
in comparing dWPLI and random networks dashed yellow
line). Furthermore, L displays inverse differences at low
densities (1-12%) compared to higher densities in the dW-
PLI vs random comparison (dashed yellow line). This in-
consistency is undesirable for translatability of integrative
behaviour of network types from sparse networks to more
Figure 3: Topological metric values for integration (C), regularity
dense networks. C does not suffer from such behaviour,
(V), modularity (Q), hierarchical complexity (R), characteristic path
displaying a constant relationship of metric values through length (L) and network entropy (H) against network density, P.
the full range of densities (solid and dashed blue lines). Curves relate to network models as indicated in the legend (bottom
right).
Given these results, for the rest of our analysis, we will
drop L and H and focus on the four proposed metric, C, V ,
Q and R. We must emphasise that this is taken purely in
terms of the simplicity of explaining a general topological
factor and does not mean that L and H are not useful for
other purposes.
4.2. Weighted Complex Hierarchy Null Model
Fig. 5 shows the mean results of C (top left), V (top
right), Q (bottom left) and R (bottom right) over 100
Figure 4: Positive (negative) values indicate the contrasted distribu-
realisations of each of the WCH models. We include a
tions exhibit the relationship provided in the legend (or its opposite).
reduced number of strength parameters in the figure (s =
Zero indicates p-value insignificant at 5% level. a) The hierarchical
0.1,0.2,...,0.7) than those computed (s = 0.05,0.1,...,0.75) complexity, R (blue), compared with network entropy, H (yellow).
for greater clarity. Above 0.75 the parameter begins to sat- b) The clustering coefficient , C (blue), compared with characteristic
path length, L (yellow). P is the network density.
urate as the weights of the hierarchy levels tend to linear
separability (linear separability occurs when s = 1 since
0s,1s,2s,... then places the edge weights, originally in
behaviours than those of the EEG or WCH networks, ex-
[0,1], in disjoint ranges [0,1],[1,2],[2,3],...). We see that
hibiting a strong unsuitability for comparisons with EEG
WCH networks (grey shaded lines) exhibit curve behaviour
networks with much higher modularity and highly right
similar to the EEG networks and E-R random graphs (as
skewed V curve (Fig. 5, top left) towards high densities
in Fig. 3). The scale-free model (red error bars) also ex-
as well as a similar right skew in R (bottom left) which
hibits a similar behaviour, however in stark contrast, the
is opposite to the left skew found for WCH and EEG net-
small-world model (blue error bars) exhibits very different
work types. Although the scale-free model exhibits similar
7

Figure 6: The z-statistics of distributions with significant differences
from a Wilcoxon rank sum test. Positive (negative) values indicate
the contrasted distributions exhibit the relationship provided in the
legend (or its opposite). Zero indicates p-value insignificant at 5%
level. P is the connection density.
works do indeed exhibit greater complexity than the WCH
model. The strong exception to this is an inability to dis-
tinguish significant differences between the maximal com-
plexity s = 0.3 WCH model and dWPLI networks within
Figure5: The topologicalcharacterisationofnetworkmodelsbyclus-
7-23% densities (bold yellow line). Also, as the weight pa-
tering coefficient, C, degree variance, V, modularity, Q and hierar-
chical complexity, R, plotted against network density, P. Grey lines rameter increases, the high plateaus previously mentioned
indicate mean values of the weighted complex hierarchy model with begin to take effect as in the medium ranges of density the
increasing light shade indicating increasing strength parameter from
R values of the dWPLI networks and WCH model becomes
s = 0.1 in steps of 0.1 up to s = 0.7. Red errorbars indicate values of
more indistinguishable, with greater complexity found in
the Albert Barabasi scale-free model. Blue errorbars indicate values
of the Watts Strogatz small-world model with increasingly light blue the range 55-57% in the WCH model with s = 0.4 (green
indicating increasing proportion of edges being randomly rewired. line).
4.3. Null model approaching EEG phase-lag networks
tendencies in topological metrics to the WCH and EEG
Fig. 7 shows the values of the four topological features-
networks, its range of values and densities is clearly very
complexity, integration, regularity and modularity for EEG
limited and so, therefore, its ability for topological refine-
dWPLI networks and the WCH network with strength pa-
ment.
rameter 0.2. We see clearly that these networks behave
By increasing the strength parameter of the WCH model
very similarly with respect to the given metrics. The most
we change the topology in a smooth fashion with decreas-
obvious difference is that the modularity, Q, of dWPLI
ing integration, regularity and modularity (Fig. 5, top
EEG networks is higher (bottom left). Also, as previously
left, top right and bottom left, respectively). Interestingly,
discussed, the dWPLI network complexity is greater than
R (bottom left) rises with increasing strength parameter
the WCH model, but it is still by far the most comparable
from s = 0.05 up to s = 0.3 where it takes its maximum
model for complexity of those presented here.
values at densities ranging from 1-30% before falling again
from s = 0.35 until s = 0.7. Further, above s = 0.3,
the curves begin to deviate significantly from those of the
5. Discussion
EEG dWPLI networks, exhibiting greater plateaus of high
complexity (lighter grey lines) which are more comparable 5.1. Complexity as revealed by weighted complex hierarchy
with the EEG coherence networks. model
Interestingly, the complexity of the EEG dWPLI net-
The behaviour demonstrated by the WCH model with
works appears to attain maximal values of R of all the
respect to R indicates that high complexity arises from
networks studied here (Fig. 3). The only model which
a hierarchical structure in which a greater degree of vari-
comes close is the WCH model (Fig. 7, bottom right).
ability is present in the rankings of weights with respect
To clarify this observation we perform Wilcoxon rank sum
to hierarchy level. Too little difference between levels and
tests on R values of the EEG dWPLI networks against
the hierarchy is too weak to maintain complex interactions,
that of the WCH model with strength parameters ranging
too much difference between levels and the complexity of
from s = 0.2 up to s = 0.4, i.e. two steps before and after
the hierarchy is dampened by a more ordered structure
the maximal complexity setting of s = 0.3. The results
produced from the tendency towards linear separability
are displayed in Fig. 6. In the vast majority of instances
of the edge weights enforced by the strength parameter.
of strength parameter and density, the EEG dWPLI net-
Thus, we provide evidence that topological complexity is
8

are built independently from the brain networks [10, 15] or
are constructed by the randomisation of connections of the
networks being compared [9, 18], run into problems with
density specification (in the case of independent models)
and reproducibility (in both types of model). With the
WCH model, we can simply create a bank of simulated
CWNs which can be used throughout the study in exactly
the same way as we use the functional connectivity CWNs.
As an example of the power and elegance of the pro-
posed model, say we want to find maximum spanning trees
[45] of our brain networks and compare with a null model,
then we simply take the maximum spanning trees of our
null model. In contrast, in [14] they use a convoluted re-
verse engineering process by assigning random weights to
the connections of Watts-Strogatz small world networks
(which are themselves of limited comparability to brain
networks) and computing the MST from these resulting
sparse weighted networks.
Figure 7: Clustering coefficient, C, degree variance, V, modularity, Further, as seen in Fig. 1.C, for technical studies which
Q, and complexity, R, against connection density, P, of binarised
rely on network simulations, the WCH model is built on
weighted networks, for WCH model (red, median (m) ± interquartile
parameters which can be altered to subtly change the re-
range (iqr)) and EEG dWPLI neworks (blue, m ± iqr).
sulting topology. This allows for sensitive analysis of a
new techniques ability to distinguish subtle topological dif-
not driven by integration, arising as a middle ground be- ferences. Such paradigms are evident in clinical studies
tween regular and random systems as previously conjec- where, for example, one may try to distinguish between
tured [7, 9], but, driven by hierarchical complexity, arising healthy and ill patients [29, 33] or between different cog-
in the middle ground between weak hierarchical topology nitive tasks [46], so that this null model offers simulations
or ’all nodes are equal’ systems, such as random or regular which are directly relatable to clinical settings.
networks, and strong hierarchical topology, such as star or
strict class-based systems including grid lattice and frac- 5.3. EEG coherence and WPLI networks
tal modular networks (see Fig. 5). Thus the hierarchical We see there is a large difference in the integration,
structure can be seen as a key aspect of the complexity modularity and complexity of the EEG coherence and dW-
inherent in complex systems. PLI networks (Fig. 3, top left, centre left and centre right,
Impressively, the dWPLI EEG networks display a gen- respectively). The EEG coherence networks (blue shade)
erally greater hierarchical complexity than that expressed behave similarly to the ring (blue lines) and grid lattice
by our model which is specifically designed to probe com- (yellow lines) networks, agreeing with the volume conduc-
plex interactions in hierarchical structures. Thus we pose tion effects that dominate zero-lag dependency measures
such complexity as a key aspect of brain function as mod- [43], i.e. the closer the nodes are the stronger the weights
elled by phase-based connectivity. are. The dWPLI networks (red shade) on the other hand
have a more integrated and less modular nature, which re-
5.2. Weighted complex hierarchy as null model
flects the notion that phase-based functionality mitigates
There are two clear reasons why the WCH model is volume conduction effects and is thus less confined by
a good fit for functional connectivity networks from EEG anatomical structure [43].
recordings. Not only does it create several hub like nodes The very high complexity of the dWPLI networks (and
giving a high degree variability, but furthermore it sim- very possibly phase-lag measures in general [47]) provides
ulates the rich club phenomena found in complex brain evidence to support that phase-based connectivity does
networks [22, 44], as the higher the hierarchy levels of two indeed largely overcome the volume conduction effect and
nodes, the stronger the weight of the connection will be therefore maintains a richer complexity echoing the com-
between them, see Fig. 1.C. plex interactions of brain functionality [1].
One of the greatest benefits of this model over others is With regards to how the WCH model advances our
that it simulates brain networks previous to network pro- understanding of dWPLI and coherence network differ-
cessing steps because it creates CWNs rather than sparse ences, we note that the high segregation of the coherence
networks. This means that any and all techniques one networks (Fig. 3 top left) is approached by the WCH
wants to use on the brain networks can be applied el- model with high values of strength parameter (Fig. 5, top
egantly and in parallel with this single null model free left) and is comparable with regular lattice and grid lat-
from any complications. Particularly, methods which cre- tice CWN curves (Fig. 3, top left, blue and yellow lines,
ate sparse binary networks directly, whether these models respectively), denoting a move to a more strict class-based
9

topology. This is also reflected in the hierarchical com- Following from this the randomisation of connections
plexity (bottom right of corresponding figures), where the used widely in null models is not a topologically randomis-
lower complexity peaking at a later density to dWPLI (Fig. ing process but, more accurately, a topologically integra-
3, centre right) is mimicked in the behaviour of increasing tive process. Such a feature is then not necessarily typical
strength parameter in the WCH model (Fig. 5, bottom of network topology and thus one must be cautious to use
right). This provides further evidence of the relevance and this as a null model unless one wants to specifically target
flexibility of the WCH model. In contrast there is an evi- integrative behaviour. Further, the practice of normalisa-
dent lack of ability to make similar comments with respect tion of graph values by E-R random graph values [48] must
to the popular small world and scale-free models. This also be used with due caution. The basis of such a normal-
criticism can be extended towards network models which isation is to contrast a networks values with those of the
randomise connections while maintaining degree distribu- ’average’ network topology [49], rather than contrasting
tions [18], since such an enforced topological attribute does with a highly specific topology which behaves very differ-
not allow one to analyse how that very important attribute ently to real world networks [50]. This evidence provides
is actually constructed. Future work will provide extension further justification for the adoption of our WCH model
to modular structures in our model to focus on what roles as a relevant and powerful replacement to these models.
modularity plays on these aspects, since Q and V behave
contrastingly to this extrapolation.
6. Conclusion
5.4. Dense scale-free networks
We introduced a metric for measuring the hierarchical
A striking feature seen is in the degree variance curves complexity of a network and a highly flexible and elegant
where a highly symmetric parabolic curve is noted with WCH model. These provided key insights into what distin-
a central maximum value for random graphs, WCH net- guishes functional brain networks from both ordered and
works and EEG networks. This feature reveals to us a spontaneous forms as generally the most complex kind of
’scale-free’ paradigm at all density levels and not just the topology and the important role that hierarchical struc-
classic sparse network scale-free at low densities. In other ture plays in this. Further, we showed that phase-based
words, the scale-free nature found in brain networks is first connectivity topology was more complex than amplitude
and foremost encoded in the connectivity weights, which, influenced connectivity topology, which we extrapolated
through selective binarisation, therefore can reveal to us as due to the more ordered structure enforced by volume
the scale-free property as expressed at different density conduction effects. In our analysis we constructed a frame-
ranges. As the density of the network increases one obtains work for CWNs for brain functional connectivity to replace
more even distributions of high and low density nodes, in- the framework for sparse networks adopted from other net-
dicated by the high values of V , and, eventually, towards work science research areas. This included the synthesis of
high densities the symmetry of V values with low densi- concepts from the literature in a succinct manner and the
ties tells us that the scale-free network is characterised by generalisation of sparse binary archetypes to CWN form.
a small number of low degree nodes and a majority of high The perspective allowed by this comprehensive analysis
degree nodes, i.e. the inverse (or complement) of the low provided new evidence regarding key factors of network
density behaviour. topology in general. Importantly we provided evidence of
the non-topologically random nature of uniformly random
5.5. Topological randomness weighted networks. From this it follows that our model is
more relevant and appropriate than prevalent connection
If we define a uniformly random topology as that which
randomisation processes. Also, a scale-free paradigm was
exhibits a uniform distribution of topological values over
extended to all network densities. Particularly, these in-
the space enveloped by the minimal and maximal topolo-
sights help towards a comprehensive understanding of the
gies, it is very apparent that E-R random networks do not
framework within which functional connectivity networks
satisfy this criteria, but, instead, have a restricted topol-
are set and thus provide invaluable information and tools
ogy at all density levels where the interquartile range is
for future clinical and technical research in neuroscience.
much smaller in comparison with that of the EEG net-
Matlab codes for all synthesis and analysis of the networks
works and the proposed null model. We thus see that
as introduced in this paper are publicly available on pub-
uniformly distributed random weights do not lead to a
lication at http://dx.doi.org/10.7488/ds/1520.
uniformly random topology in this sense, but instead to a
very particular optimally integrated, moderately regular,
lowly modular and low complexity topology at all densi-
7. Acknowledgements
ties. Based on this evidence and previous discussion of
random networks in the methods section, we suggest that Keith Smith is funded by the Engineering and Physical
E-R random networks should be re-understood as opti- Sciences Research Council (EPSRC).
mally integrated networks.
10

References [27] E. Bullmore, O. Sporns, “The economy of brain network organ-
isation”, Nature, 13:336-349, 2012.
[1] E. Bullmore, O. Sporns, “Complex brain networks: graph the- [28] A.L. Barabasi, R. Albert & H. Jeong, “Mean-field theory for
oretical analysis of structural and functional systems”, Nature scale-free random networks”, Physica A, 272(1-2): 173-187,
Neuroscience Review, 10: 186-198, 2009. 1999.
[2] C.J. Stam, “Modern network science of neurological disorders”, [29] B.M. Tijms, A.M. Wink, W. de Haan, W.M. van der Flier, C.J.
Nature Neuroscience Review, 15: 683-695, 2014. Stam, P. Scheltens, F. Barkhof, “Alzheimer’s disease: connect-
[3] D. Papo, J. M. Buldu, S. Boccaletti, E. T. Bullmore, “Complex ing findings from graph theoretical studies of brain networks”,
network theory and the brain”, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B, 369: Neurobiology of Ageing, 34: 2023-2036, 2013.
20130520, 2014. [30] J. Petersen, “Die Theorie der regul¨aren Graphs”, Acta Math.,
[4] E.RavaszandA.L.Barab´asi, “Hierarchicalorganizationincom- 15: 193-220, 1891.
plex networks”, Phys. Rev. E, 67: 026112, 2003. [31] B.M. A´ brego, S. Fernndez-Merchant, M.G. Neubauer, W.
[5] D. Meunier, R. Lambiotte & E. T. Bullmore, “Modular and hi- Watkins, “Sum of squares of degrees in a graph”, Journal of
erarchically modular organisation of brain networks”, Frontiers Inequalities in Pure and Applied Mathematics, 10(3): 64, 2009.
in Neurscience, doi: 10.3389/fnins.2010.00200, 2010. [32] C.J. Stam, B.F. Jones, G. Nolte, M. Breakspear, P. Schel-
[6] M. Costa, A.L. Goldberger, C.-K. Peng, “Multiscale entropy tens, “Small-World Networks and Functional Connectivity in
analysis of biological signals”, Phys. Rev. E, 71: 021906, 2005. Alzheimer’s Disease”, Cerebral Cortex, 17:92-99, 2007.
[7] G. Tononi, O. Sporns, G.M. Edelman, ”A measure for brain [33] M. Lynall, D. S. Bassett, R. Kerwin, P.J. McKenna, M.
complexity: Relating functional segregation and integration in Kitzbichler, U. Muller & E. Bullmore, “Functional Connectiv-
the nervous system”, Proc Natl Acad Sci, 91(11):5033-7, 1994. ity and brain networks in schizophrenia”, J Neurosci, 30(28):
[8] R.Sol´e & S. Valverde, “Information theory of complex networks: 9477-9487, 2010.
on evolution and architectural constraints”, Lect. Notes Phys., [34] C.E. Ginestet, T.E. Nichols, E.T. Bullmore, A. Simmons,
650: 189-207, 2004. ”Brain network analysis: separating cost from topology us-
[9] D.J. Watts & S.H. Strogatz, “Collective dynamics of small- ing cost-integration”, PloS One, 6, e21570, doi: 10.1371/jour-
world networks”,Letters to Nature, 393: 440-442, 1998. nal.pone.0021570, 2011.
[10] O. Sporns, “Small-world connectivity, motif composition, and [35] A.L. Goldberger, L.A.N. Amaral, L. Glass, J.M. Hausdorff,
complexity of fractal neuronal connections”, BioSystems, 85: P.C. Ivanov, R.G. Mark, J.E. Mietus, G.B. Moody, C.K.
5564, 2006. Peng, H.E. Stanley, “PhysioBank, PhysioToolkit, and Phys-
[11] M. Rubinov, O. Sporns, “Weight-conserving characterization of ioNet: Components of a new research resource for complex
complex functional brain networks”, Neuroimage, 56(4):2068- physiologic signals”, Circulation, 101(23): e215-e220, dataset:
2079, 2011. doi:10.13026/C28G6P, 2000.
[12] F. D.V. Fallani, J. Richiardi, M. Chavez, S. Achard, “Graph [36] M.E.J. Newman, M. Girvan, “Finding and evaluating commu-
analysis of functional brain networks: practical issues in trans- nity structure in networks”, Phys. Rev. E, 69(2): 026113, 2004.
lational neuroscience”, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. B: Biological Sci- [37] M.E.J. Newman, “Modularity and community structure in net-
ences, 369 (1653): 20130521, 2014. works”, Phys Rev E, 23: 8577-8582, 2006.
[13] C. Li, H. Wang, W. de Haan, C.J. Stam, P. Van Mieghem, “The [38] V.D. Blondel, J-L. Guillaume, R. Lambiotte, E. Lefebvre, “Fast
correlation of metrics in complex networks with applications in unfoldingofcommunitiesinlargenetworks”, J. Stat. Mech., doi:
functional brain networks”, J. Stat. Mech., doi:10.1088/1742- 10.1088/1742-5468/2008/10/P10008, 2008.
5468/ 2011/11/P11018, 2011. [39] C.E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication”,
[14] P. Tewarie, E. van Dellen, A. Hillebrand, C.J. Stam, “The min- Bell System Technical Journal, 27: 623656, 1948.
imum spanning tree: an unbiased method for brain network [40] G.Schalk, D.J.McFarland, T.Hinterberger, N.Birbaumer, J.R.
analysis”, Neuroimage, 104: 177-188, 2015. Wolpaw, “BCI2000: A General-Purpose Brain-Computer Inter-
[15] A.L. Barabasi & R. Albert, “Emergence of Scaling in Random face (BCI) System”, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engi-
Networks”, Science, 286: 509-512,1999. neering, 51(6):1034-1043, 2004.
[16] M.E.J. Newman, “Networks”, Oxford University Press, Oxford, [41] R. Oostenveld, P. Fries, E. Maris and J-M. Schoffelen, “Field-
2010. Trip: Open Source Software for Advanced Analysis of MEG,
[17] O. Sporns, “Networks of the Brain”, MIT Press, MA, 2010. EEG, and Invasive Electrophysiological Data”, Computational
[18] M. Rubinov, O. Sporns, “Complex network measures of brain Intelligence and Neuroscience, Volume 2011, 156869, 9 pages,
connectivity: Uses and interpretations”, NeuroImage, 52:1059- 2011.
1069, 2010. [42] M. Vinck, R. Oostenveld, M. van Wingerden, F. Battaglia,
[19] V.M. Eguiluz, D.R. Chialvo, G.A. Cecchi, M. Baliki, A. V. Ap- C.M.A. Pennartz, “An improved index of phase-synchronization
karian, “Scale Free Brain Functional Networks”, Physical Re- for electrophysiological data in the presence of volume-
view Letters, 94: 018102, 2005. conduction, noise and sample-size bias”, NeuroImage, 55:1548-
[20] T.A.B. Snijders, “The degree variance: an index of graph het- 1565, 2011.
erogeneity”, Social Networks, 3(3): 163-174, 1981. [43] E. van Diessen, T. Numan, E. van Dellen, A.W. van der Kooi,
[21] A. Sandryhaila, J.M.F. Moura, “Discrete Signal Processing on M. Boersma, D. Hofman, R. van Lutterveld, B.W. van Dijk,
Graphs”, IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, 61(7):1644- E.C.W. van Straaten, A. Hillebrand, C.J. Stam, “Opportunities
1656, 2013. and methodological challenges in EEG and MEG resting state
[22] J.J. McAuley, L.F. Costa, T.S. Caetano, “The rich-club phe- functional brain network research”, Clinical Neurophysiology,
nomena across complex network hierarchies”, Appl. Phys. Lett., doi:10.1016/j.clinph.2014.11.018, 2014.
91, doi: 10.1063/1.2773951, 2007. [44] M.P.vandenHeuvel, O.Sporns, “Rich-ClubOrganisationofthe
[23] P. Erd¨os & A. R´enyi, “On Random Graphs”, Publicationes Human Connectome”, Journal of Neuroscience, 31(44): 15775-
Mathematicae Debrecen, 6:290-297, 1959. 15786, 2011.
[24] P. Bonacich, P. Lloyd, “Eigenvector-like measures of central- [45] C.J. Stam, P. Tewarie, E. Van Dellen, E.C.W. van Straaten, A.
ity for asymmetric relations”, Social Networks, 23(3): 191-201, Hillebrand, P. Van Mieghem, “The trees and the forest: Char-
2001. acterization of complex brain networks with minimum spanning
[25] M. Molloy & B. Reed, “A critical point for random graphs with trees”, International Journal of Psychophysiology, 92: 129-138,
a given degree sequence”, Random Structures & Algorithms, 6 2014.
(2-3): 161-180, 1995. [46] K. Smith, H. Azami, J. Escudero, M.A. Parra, J.M. Starr,
[26] S. Milgram, “The Small World Problem”, Psychology To- ”Comparison of Network Analysis Approaches on EEG Con-
day,1(1): 61-67, 1967. nectivity in Beta during Visual Short-Term Memory Tasks”,
11

Proceedings of the IEEE EMBC15, 2207 - 2210, 2015.
[47] J. Dauwels, F. Viallate, T. Musha, A. Cichocki, “A compar-
ative study of synchrony measures for the early diagnosis of
Alzheimer’s disease based on EEG”, NeuroImage, 49(1): 668-
693, 2010.
[48] M.D. Humphries, K. Gurney, “Network ’Small-world-ness’:
A Quantitative Method for Determining Canonical Network
Equivalence”, PLoS One, 3(4): e0002051, 2008.
[49] B. Bolloba´s, “Random Graphs”, ch.8 of “Modern Graph The-
ory”, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, Springer New York, 184:
215-252, doi:0.1007/978-1-4612-0619-4 7, 1998.
[50] M.E.J. Newman, “Random graphs as models of networks”, ch.2
from S. Bornholdt, H.G. Schu¨ster,“Handbook of Graphs and
Networks: From the Genome to the Internet”, Wiley, UK, DOI:
10.1002/3527602755, 2006.
12