**FULL TITLE**
ASP Conference Series, Vol. **VOLUME**, **YEAR OF PUBLICATION**
**NAMES OF EDITORS**
Correlation Analysis of Mode Frequencies with Activity
Proxies at Different Phases of the Solar Cycle
Kiran Jain, S. C. Tripathy, and F. Hill
9002 beF 9  ]RS.hp-ortsa[  1v5551.2090:viXra
National Solar Observatory, 950 N. Cherry Avenue, Tucson, AZ 85719,
USA. Email: kjain@noao.edu
Abstract. We analyze intermediate degree p- and f-mode eigenfrequencies
measured by GONG and MDI/SOHO for a complete solar cycle to study their
correlation with solar activity. We demonstrate that the frequencies do vary
linearly with the activity, however the degree of correlation differs from phase to
phase of the cycle. During the rising and the declining phases, the mode frequen-
cies are strongly correlated with the activity proxies whereas during the low- and
high-activity periods, the frequencies have significantly lower correlation with all
the activity proxies considered here.
1. Introduction
The linear variation of mode frequencies with the changing solar magnetic activ-
ity is well established (Jain & Bhatnagar 2003; Chaplin et al. 2007). However,
detailed studies based on high quality uniform data indicate the complexity
of the relationship between mode frequencies and solar activity. For example,
Howe, Komm & Hill (1999) have shown that there is a latitudinal variation in
frequencies and splitting coefficients. In addition, Tripathy et al. (2007) found
a year-wise distribution in linear-regression slopes (i e. the change in frequency
per unit change in activity) and the degree of correlation. Thus, with the avail-
ability of continuous data for a complete solar cycle, it is important to study
correlations of oscillation frequencies with different measures of the solar activity
in order to understand the source of the variability.
2. Analysis and Results
The analysis presented here uses oscillation data sets obtained from the Global
Oscillation Network Group (GONG) and Michelson Doppler Imager (MDI) on-
board Solar and Helipspheric Observatory (SOHO) and solar activity data. It
covers a period of about 13 years, i.e. a complete solar cycle including both
minimum phases at the beginning and end of solar cycle 23. The 128 108-day
GONG data sets spanning over the period from 1995 May 7 to 2008 Feb 27
are continuous while the 61 72-day MDI data sets have two large gaps in 1998-
1999. The MDI data cover the period from 1996 May 1 to 2008 Sept 30. The
activity data used here are: the integrated emission from the solar disk at 10.7
cm wavelength (F ), the line-of sight magnetic field strength from Kitt Peak
10
Observatory (KPMI), the international sunspot number (R I), the Mt. Wilson
sunspot index (MWSI), the magnetic plage strength index (MPSI) from Mt.
1

2 Jain et al.
Figure 1. Temporal evolution of the GONG p-mode frequency shifts (sym-
bols) with different activity proxies (filled regions).
Wilson and the total solar irradiance (TSI). Details of the various data sets are
given in (Jain, Tripathy & Hill 2008).
The number of p- modes analysed here are 479 for GONG and 876 for MDI
data sets in the frequency range 1.5 ≤ ν ≤ 4.0 mHz. These modes are observed
in all data sets of GONG or MDI. We also analyze 76 f-modes observed in all
MDI data sets. The frequency shifts (δν) are calculated with respect to the
reference frequency which is determined by taking an average of the frequencies
of a particular multiplet (n,ℓ).
The temporal variation of GONG frequency shifts (δν) with various mea-
sures of solar activity (I) are shown in Figure 1. It is evident that the frequency
shifts follow the general trend of the solar activity. The correlation coefficients
between δν and I obtained in all cases are comparable. However, we find sig-
nificant different correlation coefficients when we divide the activity cycle into
four phases as shown in Figure 2; the periods of minimum activity at the begin-
ning and end of the solar cycle (Phase I), rising activity (Phase II), high-acivity
(Phase III), and declining activity (Phase IV). In the right panel of Figure 2, we
compare the phase-wise Pearson’s linear correlation coefficients (r P) for both
GONG and MDI data sets with those obtained for the complete cycle. It is
interesting to note that the correlation between δν and solar activity changes
significantly from phase to phase; the rising and declining phases are better cor-
related than the low- and high-activity phases. The frequencies during Phase
I do not correlate well with any of the proxies. During Phase III, we obtain

Mode Frequencies and Solar Activity Phases 3
Figure 2. (Left) Different phases of the solar activity cycle: Phase I shown
by filled regions at the begining and the end of curve corresponds to low
activity period, Phase II the rising activity, Phase III the high activity and
Phase IV the declining activity periods. (Right) Bar-chart showing phase-
wise variation of the Pearson’s linear correlation coefficient between p-mode
frequency shifts and different activity indices. Each activity phase has values
for GONG (filled) and MDI (hatched) data sets. The missing values for
KPMI are due to unavailablity of sufficient activity data points. Correlation
coefficients for all data sets are also shown here.
significant correlations for F and KPMI while a substantial decrease is noticed
10
for R I, MWSI and TSI.
Figure 3 (left panel) shows the temporal variation of f-mode frequencies. We
notice two distinct features in frequency shifts; the persisting strong 1-year pe-
riodicity as discussed by several authors (Antia et al. 2001; Jain & Bhatnagar
2003; Dziembowski & Goode 2005) and the frequencies at current solar mini-
mum (2007-2008) are lower than those at the previous minimum (1996). The
correlation coefficients obtained with the original and smoothed frequency shifts
are also shown in the right panel. The smoothed frequency shifts are the running
mean of five points to minimize the effect of 1-year periodicity. It is seen that
smoothing enhances the correlation in all cases. The variation in correlation co-
efficients for f-modes at different phases are consistent with those for p-modes.
In both cases, MDI data sets have good correlation with TSI at the low-activity
phase that requires a detailed investigation.
3. Summary
In summary, the improved and continuous measurements of intermediate-degree
mode frequencies for a complete solar cycle demonstrate that, while the fre-
quencies vary in phase with the solar activity, the degree of correlation between
frequencies and activity indices differs from one activity phase to another. Al-
though there is a strong correlation during rising and declining activity phases,
we find a significant decrease in correlation at the low- and high-activity phases.
Acknowledgments. This work utilizes data obtained by the Global Os-
cillation Network Group (GONG) project, managed by the National Solar Ob-

4 Jain et al.
Figure 3. (Left) Temporal evolution of f-mode frequency shifts (circles) and
solar activity (filled regions). (Right) Linear correlation coefficients between
f-mode frequency shifts and activity indices for different phases of the solar
cycle. Hatched bars show the correlation coefficients between actual values
of frequency shifts and activity proxies while open bars are for correlation
coefficients between smoothed value of frequency shifts and activity proxies.
servatory, which is operated by AURA, Inc. under a cooperative agreement
with the National Science Foundation. The data were acquired by instruments
operated by the Big Bear Solar Observatory, High Altitude Observatory, Lear-
month Solar Observatory, Udaipur Solar Observatory, Instituto de Astrof´ısico
de Canarias, and Cerro Tololo Interamerican Observatory. It also utilises data
from the Solar Oscillations Investigation/Michelson Doppler Imager on the Solar
and Heliospheric Observatory. SOHO is a mission of international cooperation
between ESA and NASA. NSO/Kitt Peak magnetic used here are produced
cooperatively by NSF/NOAO; NASA/GSFC and NOAA/SEL. This study also
includes data from the synoptic program at the 150-Foot Solar Tower of the
Mt. Wilson Observatory, operated by UCLA, with funding from NASA, ONR
and NSF, under agreement with the Mt. Wilson Institute. The unpublished
solar irradiance dataset (version v6 001 0804) was obtained from VIRGO Team
through PMOD/WRC, Davos, Switzerland. This work was supported by NASA
grants NNG05HL41I and NNG08EI54I.
References
Antia, H. M., Basu, S., Pintar, J., & Schou, J. 2001, in ESA SP-464,: Proceedings of
SOHO 10/GONG 2000 Workshop: Helio- and asteroseismology at the dawn of
the millennium, ed. A. Wilson & P. L. Palle (Noordwijk: ESA Publications) 27
Chaplin, W. J., Elsworth, Y., Miller, B. A., & Verner, G. A. 2007, ApJ, 659, 1760
Dziembowski, W. A., & Goode, P. R. 2005, ApJ, 625, 548
Howe, R., Komm, R., & Hill, F. 1999, ApJ, 524, 1084
Jain, K., & Bhatnagar, A. 2003, Solar Phys., 213, 257
Jain, K., Tripathy, S. C., & Hill, F. 2008, ApJ, submitted
Tripathy, S. C., Hill, F., Jain, K., & Leibacher, J. W. 2007, Solar Phys., 243, 105

| 0   | 1   |
|:----|:----|
|     |     |