GEOMETRIC CHARACTERIZATION OF L -SPACES
1
NORMUXAMMAD YADGOROV, MUKHTAR IBRAGIMOV, AND KARIMBERGEN KUDAYBERGENOV
3102 voN 81  ]AF.htam[  1v9244.1131:viXra
ABSTRACT. The paper is devoted to a description of all strongly facially symmetric spaces which are
isometrically isomorphic to L -spaces. We prove that if Z is a real neutral strongly facially symmetric
1
space such that every maximal geometric tripotent from the dual space of Z is unitary then, the space Z is
isometrically isomorphicto the space L 1(Ω,Σ,µ), where (Ω,Σ,µ) is an appropriatemeasure space having
the direct sum property.
1. INTRODUCTION
One of the main problem in operator algebras is a geometric characterization of operator algebras
and operator spaces. In this connection in papers of Y. Friedman and B. Russo the so-called facially
symmetric spaces were introduced (see [4–9, 12]). In [8], the complete structure of atomic facially
symmetric spaces was determined. More precisely, it was shown that an irreducible, neutral, strongly
facially symmetric space is linearly isometric to the predual of one of the Cartan factors of types 1 to
6, provided that it satisfies some natural and physically significant axioms, four in number, which are
known to hold in the preduals of all JBW∗-triples.
The project of classifying facially symmetric spaces was started in [7], where, using two of the pure
state properties, denoted by STP and FE, geometric characterizations of complex Hilbert spaces and
complex spin factors were given. The former is precisely a rank 1 JBW∗-triple and a special case of a
Cartan factor of type 1, and the latter is the Cartan factor of type 4 and a special case of a JBW∗-triple
of rank 2. The explicit structure of a spin factor naturally embedded in a facially symmetric space was
then used in [8] to construct abstract generating sets and complete the classification in the atomic case.
In [12] a geometric characterization of the dual ball of global JB∗-triples was given.
The present paper is devoted to a description of all real strongly facially symmetric spaces which are
isometrically isomorphic to L -spaces. Using Kakutani’s characterization of real L -spaces, we show
1 1
that a neutral strongly facially symmetric space in which every maximal geometric tripotent is unitary,
is isometrically isomorphic to an L -space. None of the extra axioms used in [7,8,12] are assumed.
1
2. FACIALLY SYMMETRIC SPACES
In this section we shall recall some basic facts and notation about facially symmetric spaces (see for
details [4–8]).
Let Z be a real or complex normed space. Elements x, y ∈ Z are orthogonal, notation x♦y, if
kx + yk = kx − yk = kxk + kyk. Subsets S, T ⊂ Z are said to be orthogonal, notation (S♦T), if x♦y
for all (x, y) ∈ S × T. A norm exposed face of the unit ball Z of Z is a non-empty set (necessarily
1
6= Z ) of the form F = F = {x ∈ Z : u(x) = 1}, where u ∈ Z∗, kuk = 1. Recall that a face G of
1 u
1

2 N. YADGOROV, M. IBRAGIMOV, AND K. KUDAYBERGENOV
a convex set K is a non-empty convex subset of K such that if λy + (1 − λ)z ∈ G, where y, z ∈ K,
λ ∈ (0, 1) implies y, z ∈ G. In particular, an extreme point of K is a face of K. An element u ∈ Z∗ is
called a projective unit if ||u|| = 1 and hu, yi = 0 for all y ∈ F♦. Here, for any subset S, S♦ denotes
u
the set of all elements orthogonal to each element of S.
A norm exposed face F in Z is said to be symmetric face if there is a linear isometric symmetry S
u 1 u
of Z onto Z, with S2 = I such that the fixed point set of S is (spF ) ⊕ F♦.
u u u u
Recall that a normed space Z is said to be weakly facially symmetric (WFS) if every norm exposed
face in Z is symmetric.
1
For each symmetric face F the contractive projections P (F ), k = 0, 1, 2 on Z defined as follows.
u k u
First P (F ) = (I −S )/2 is the projection on the −1 eigenspace of S . Next define P (F ) and P (F )
1 u u u 2 u 0 u
as the projections of Z onto spF and F♦, respectively, so that P (F ) + P (F ) = (I + S )/2. A
u u 2 u 0 u u
geometric tripotent is a projective unit u with the property that F is a symmetric face and S∗u = u for
u u
symmetry S corresponding to u. The projections P (F ) are called geometric Peirce projections.
u k u
GT and SF denote the collections of geometric tripotents and symmetric faces respectively, and the
map GT ∋ u 7→ F ∈ SF is a bijection [5, Proposition 1.6]. For each geometric tripotent u in the dual of
u
a WFS space Z, we shall denote the geometric Peirce projections by P (u) = P (F ), k = 0, 1, 2. Two
k k u
elements f and g of Z∗ are orthogonal if one of them belongs to P (u)∗(Z∗) and the other to P (u)∗(Z∗)
2 0
for some geometric tripotent u.
A contractive projection Q on a normed space Z is said to be neutral if for each x ∈ Z, kQ(x)k = kxk
implies Q(x) = x. A normed space Z is neutral if for every symmetric face F , the projection P (F ) is
u 2 u
neutral.
A WFS space Z is strongly facially symmetric (SFS) if for every norm exposed face F in Z and
u 1
every g ∈ Z∗ with kgk = 1 and F ⊂ F , we have S∗g = g, where S denotes a symmetry associated
u g u u
with F .
u
The principal examples of neutral complex strongly facially symmetric spaces are preduals of complex
JBW∗-triples, in particular, the preduals of von Neumann algebras, see [6]. In these cases, as shown
in [6], geometric tripotents correspond to tripotents in a JBW∗-triple and to partial isometries in a von
Neumann algebra.
In a neutral strongly facially symmetric space Z, every non-zero element has a polar decomposition [5,
Theorem 4.3]: for nonzero x ∈ Z there exists a unique geometric tripotent v = v with hv, xi = kxk
x
and hv, x♦i = 0. If x, y ∈ Z, then x♦y if and only if v ♦v , as follows from [4, Corollary 1.3(b) and
x y
Lemma 2.1].
A partial ordering can be defined on the set of geometric tripotents as follows: if u, v ∈ GT, then
u ≤ v, if F ⊂ F , or equivalently ( [5, Lemma 4.2]) P (u)∗v = u or v − u is either zero or a geometric
u v 2
tripotent orthogonal to u.
3. MAIN RESULT
Henceforth ”face” means ”norm exposed face”.
Let Z be a real neutral strongly facially symmetric space. A geometric tripotent u ∈ GT is said to be
– maximal if P (u) = 0;
0

GEOMETRIC CHARACTERIZATION OF L -SPACES 3
1
– unitary if P (u) = I.
2
It is clear that any unitary geometric tripotent is maximal.
Notice that a geometric tripotent e is a unitary if and only if the convex hull of the set F ∪ F
e −e
coincides with the unit ball Z , i.e.
1
(3.1) Z = co{F ∪ F }.
1 e −e
Also note that property (3.1) is a much stronger property than the Jordan decomposition property of a
face (see [12, Lemmata 2.3-2.6]). Recall that a face F satisfies the Jordan decomposition property if its
u
real span coincides with the geometric Peirce 2-space of the geometric tripotent u.
Rn
Example 3.1. The space with the norm
n
Rn
||x|| = |t |, x = (t ) ∈
i i
i=1
X
Rn ∼ (Rn)∗
is a SFS-space. If e ∈ = is a maximal geometric tripotent then
e = (ε , ε , . . ., ε ), ε ∈ {−1, 1}, i ∈ 1, n,
1 2 n i
and in this case the face
n
Rn
F = x ∈ : ε t = 1, ε t ≥ 0, i = 1, n
e i i i i
( )
i=1
X
satisfies (3.1).
More generally, consider a measure space (Ω, Σ, µ) with measure µ having the direct sum property,
i.e. there is a family {Ω } ⊂ Σ, 0 < µ(Ω ) < ∞, i ∈ J, such that for any A ∈ Σ, µ(A) < ∞, there
i i∈J i
exist a countable subset J ⊂ J and a set B with zero measure such that A = (A ∩ Ω ) ∪ B.
0 i
i∈J0
Let L (Ω, Σ, µ) be the space of all real integrable functions on (Ω, Σ, µ). ThSe space L (Ω, Σ, µ) with
1 1
the norm
||f|| = |f(t)| dµ(t), f ∈ L (Ω, Σ, µ)
1
Z
Ω
∼
is a SFS-space. If e ∈ L∞(Ω, Σ, µ) = L (Ω, Σ, µ)∗ is a maximal geometric tripotent then
1
e = χ˜ − χ˜ for some A ∈ Σ,
A Ω\A
where χ˜ is the class containing the indicator function of the set A ∈ Σ. Then the face
A
F = f ∈ L (Ω, Σ, µ) : ||f|| = 1, e(t)f(t) dµ(t) = 1
e 1
 
Z
 Ω 
satisfies (3.1).
 
The next result is the main result of the paper, giving a description of all strongly facially symmetric
spaces which are isometrically isomorphic to L -spaces.
1

4 N. YADGOROV, M. IBRAGIMOV, AND K. KUDAYBERGENOV
Theorem 3.2. Let Z be a real neutral strongly facially symmetric space such that every maximal geo-
metric tripotent from Z∗ is unitary. Then there exits a measure space (Ω, Σ, µ) with measure µ having
the direct sum property such that the space Z is isometrically isomorphic to the space L (Ω, Σ, µ).
1
For the proof we need several lemmata.
Let u, v ∈ GT. If F ∩ F 6= ∅ then by u ∧ v we denote the unique geometric tripotent such that
u v
F = F ∩ F , otherwise we set u ∧ v = 0.
u∧v u v
Lemma 3.3. Let e be unitary and let v ∈ GT. Then F ∩ F 6= ∅ or F ∩ F 6= ∅.
v e −v e
Proof. Let x ∈ F . By equality (3.1) we obtain that
v
x = ty + (1 − t)z
for some y, −z ∈ F and 0 ≤ t ≤ 1.
e
If t = 1 or t = 0 then x = y or x = z, respectively. Hence x ∈ F ∩ F or −x ∈ F ∩ F .
v e −v e
Let 0 < t < 1. Since F is a face, y, z ∈ F . Therefore F ∩ F 6= ∅ and F ∩ F 6= ∅. The proof is
v v v e −v e
(cid:3)
complete.
Lemma 3.4. Let e be unitary. Then for every u ∈ GT there exist mutually orthogonal geometric tripo-
tents u , u ≤ e such that u = u − u .
1 2 1 2
Proof. Put
u = u ∧ e, u = (−u) ∧ e.
1 2
Let us prove that
u ♦u , u = u − u .
1 2 1 2
Let x ∈ F and x ∈ F . Then
1 u1 2 u2
x , x ∈ F , x , −x ∈ F ,
1 2 e 1 2 u
and therefore
x + x x − x
1 2 1 2
∈ F , ∈ F .
e u
2 2
Thus
x + x x − x
1 2 1 2
= 1, = 1,
2 2
(cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13)
and (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13) (cid:13)
||x + x || = ||x − x || = 2 = ||x || + ||x ||.
1 2 1 2 1 2
Hence x ♦x , and therefore u ♦u .
1 2 1 2
Now suppose that v = u−u +u 6= 0. By Lemma 3.3 we know that that F ∩F 6= ∅ or F ∩F 6= ∅.
1 2 v e −v e
Without loss of generality it can be assumed that F ∩ F 6= ∅. Thus there exists an element x ∈ Z such
v e 1
that
hv, xi = he, xi = 1.

GEOMETRIC CHARACTERIZATION OF L -SPACES 5
1
Since v ≤ u, we have hu, xi = 1. Thus x ∈ F ∩ F , i.e. x ∈ F or hu , xi = 1. Since u ♦u , we have
u e u1 1 1 2
hu , xi = 0. Hence
2
hv, xi = hu, xi − hu , xi + hu , xi = 0,
1 2
(cid:3)
a contradiction. The proof is complete.
Lemma 3.5. Let u, w be orthogonal geometric tripotents. Then u + w is maximal if and only if u − w is
maximal.
Proof. Let u+w be maximal. Suppose that u−w is not maximal. Then there exists a maximal geometric
tripotent e such that e > u−w. Set w = e−u+w. Then w ♦u and w ♦w. Therefore u+w < u+w+w .
1 1 1 1
(cid:3)
This contradicts the maximality of u + w. The proof is complete.
Recall that a face F of a convex set K is called split face if there exists a face G (F ∩ G = ∅),
called complementary to F, such that K is the direct convex sum F ⊕ G; i.e. any element x ∈ K
c
can be uniquely represented in the form x = ty + (1 − t)z, where t ∈ [0, 1], y ∈ F, z ∈ G (see
e.g. [1, P. 420], [2]).
Lemma 3.6. Let u, w be orthogonal geometric tripotents. If u + w is maximal then
(3.2) F = F ⊕ F .
u+w u c w
Proof. First we shall show that
F = co{F ∪ F }.
u+w u w
It suffices to show that
F ⊆ co{F ∪ F }.
u+w u w
By Lemma 3.5 the geometric tripotent u − w is maximal. Therefore the face F satisfies equality
u−w
(3.1), i.e.
Z = co{F ∪ F }.
1 u−w w−u
Thus every element x ∈ F has the form
u+w
x = ty + (1 − t)z
for some y, −z ∈ F and 0 ≤ t ≤ 1.
u−w
Consider the following three cases.
Case 1. If t = 0 then x ∈ F ∩ F = F .
u+w w−u w
Case 2. If t = 1 then x ∈ F ∩ F = F .
u+w u−w u
Case 3. If 0 < t < 1 then applying the geometric tripotent u + w to the equality x = ty + (1 − t)z we
obtain
(3.3) tu(y) + tw(y) + (1 − t)u(z) + (1 − t)w(z) = 1.
Since y ∈ F and z ∈ F we see that
u−w w−u
u(y) − w(y) = 1, w(z) − u(z) = 1.

6 N. YADGOROV, M. IBRAGIMOV, AND K. KUDAYBERGENOV
Thus
(3.4) tu(y) − tw(y) − (1 − t)u(z) + (1 − t)w(z) = 1.
Summing (3.3) and (3.4) we get
tu(y) + (1 − t)w(z) = 1.
Since |u(y)| ≤ 1 and |w(z)| ≤ 1 the last equality implies that
u(y) = w(z) = 1.
This means that y ∈ F and z ∈ F . Therefore
u w
x = ty + (1 − t)z ∈ co{F ∪ F }.
u w
Consequently F = co{F ∪ F }. Taking into account that F ♦F we get F = F ⊕ F . The
u+w u w u w u+w u c w
(cid:3)
proof is complete.
Let u be an arbitrary geometric tripotent and let e be a maximal geometric tripotent such that u ≤ e.
First we shall show that
Z = spF ⊕ spF ,
u w
where w = e − u. Using equalities (3.1) and (3.2) we obtain
Z = spZ = sp{co{F ∪ F }} =
1 e −e
= spF = sp{F ⊕ F } = spF ⊕ spF ,
e u c w u w
i.e.
Z = spF ⊕ spF .
u w
From spF ♦spF it follows that spF ♦spF , and therefore
u w u w
Z = spF ⊕ spF .
u w
This implies that
P (u) + P (w) = I.
2 2
Since P (u)P (u) = 0 and P (w) = P (u)P (w) (see [5, Corollary 3.4]) we obtain P (u)P (w) = 0.
1 0 2 0 2 1 2
Therefore
P (u) = P (u)I = P (u)[P (u) + P (w)] = 0.
1 1 1 2 2
So we have
Lemma 3.7. For every u ∈ GT the projection P (u) = 0 is zero.
1
For orthogonal geometric tripotents v , v we have
1 2
(3.5) P (v + v ) = P (v ) + P (v ).
2 1 2 2 1 2 2
Indeed, by [5, Lemma 1.8] we have
P (v + v ) = P (v )P (v ).
0 1 2 0 1 0 2

GEOMETRIC CHARACTERIZATION OF L -SPACES 7
1
Using the last equality and taking into account the equalities P (v ) = P (v ) = P (v + v ) = 0,
1 1 1 2 1 1 2
together with Corollary 3.4 of [5], we get
2
P (v + v ) = I − P (v + v ) = I − P (v + v ) =
2 1 2 0 1 2 0 1 2
= (P (v ) + P (v ))(P (v ) + P (v )) − P (v )P (v ) =
2 1 0 1 2 2 0 2 0 1 0 2
= P (v ) + P (v ) + P (v )P (v ) − P (v )P (v ) =
2 1 2 2 0 1 0 2 0 1 0 2
= P (v ) + P (v ).
2 1 2 2
Now we fix a unitary e ∈ GT.
On the space Z we define order (depending on e) by the following rule:
R+
(3.6) x ≥ y ⇔ x − y ∈ F .
e
Lemma 3.8. Z is a partially ordered linear space, i.e.
(1) x ≤ x;
(2) x ≤ y, y ≤ z ⇒ x ≤ z;
(3) x ≤ y, y ≤ x ⇒ x = y;
(4) x ≤ y ⇒ x + z ≤ y + z;
(5) x ≥ 0, λ ≥ 0 ⇒ λx ≥ 0.
Proof. The properties (1), (4) and (5) are trivial.
R+ R+
To prove (2), let x ≤ y and y ≤ z. Then y − x, z − y ∈ F . Thus z − x ∈ F , i.e. x ≤ z.
e e
For (3), let x ≤ y, y ≤ x. Then y − x = αa and x − y = βb for some α, β ≥ 0 and a, b ∈ F .
e
Therefore αa + βb = 0. Applying to this equality the geometric tripotent e we obtain α + β = 0. Thus
(cid:3)
α = β = 0, i.e. x = y. The proof is complete.
Remark 3.9. Note that if v ≤ e then [12, Lemma 2.4] implies that
(3.7) P (v)(F ) ⊆ F , k = 0, 2.
k e e
Lemma 3.10. Let a, b, x, y ≥ 0 with a♦b. If a − b = x − y then
x − a = y − b ≥ 0;
in addition, if x♦y then x = a and y = b.
Proof. Let v be the smallest geometric tripotent such that v (a) = ||a|| (polar decomposition). Since
a a
a ≥ 0 it follows that v ≤ e. Applying the projection P (v ) to the equality a − b = x − y we obtain
a 2 a
P (v )(x) − P (v )(y) = P (v )(a − b) = P (v )(a) = a.
2 a 2 a 2 a 2 a
Using (3.7) we get
R+
P (v )(x) − a = P (v )(y) ∈ F ,
2 a 2 a e
and therefore
x − a = P (v )(x) + P (v )(x) − a =
2 a 0 a
R+
= [P (v )(x) − a] + P (v )(x) ∈ F ,
2 a 0 a e

8 N. YADGOROV, M. IBRAGIMOV, AND K. KUDAYBERGENOV
i.e. x ≥ a.
Now suppose that x♦y. Then as shown above, x ≥ a and a ≥ x. Thus x = a and y = b. The proof is
(cid:3)
complete.
Lemma 3.11. For x ∈ Z the following conditions are equivalent:
(1) x ≥ 0;
(2) ||x|| = he, xi.
Proof. Take x ≥ 0, i.e. x = αy for some α ≥ 0 and y ∈ F . Then
e
||x|| = ||αy|| = α||y|| = α = αhe, yi = he, xi.
x (cid:3)
Conversely, if ||x|| = he, xi, x 6= 0, then ∈ F , i.e. x ≥ 0. The proof is complete.
e
||x||
Lemma 3.12. Every element x ∈ Z can be uniquely represented as a sum
x = x − x ,
+ −
where x , x ≥ 0 and x ♦x .
+ − + −
Proof. Take the smallest geometric tripotent v ∈ GT such that v (x) = ||x||. By Lemma 3.4 there exist
x x
mutually orthogonal geometric tripotents v , v ≤ e such that v = v − v . Put
1 2 x 1 2
x = P (v )(x), x = −P (v )(x).
+ 2 1 − 2 2
By the proof of [5, Theorem 4.3 (d)] we get hv , xi = ||P (v )(x)||, and therefore
1 2 1
he, x i = he, P (v )(x)i = hP∗(v )e, xi =
+ 2 1 2 1
= hv , xi = ||P (v )(x)|| = ||x ||.
1 2 1 +
This means that x ≥ 0. Similarly x ≥ 0. Further using equality (3.5) we find that x = x − x and
+ − + −
(cid:3)
x ♦x . Uniqueness follows from Lemma 3.10. The proof is complete.
+ −
Lemma 3.13. Z is a lattice, i.e. for any x, y ∈ Z there exist
x ∨ y, x ∧ y ∈ Z.
Proof. By Lemma 3.12 there exist mutually orthogonal elements a, b ≥ 0 such that x − y = a − b. Then
x + y + a + b
(3.8) x ∨ y = ,
2
x + y − a − b
(3.9) x ∧ y = .
2
Indeed,
x + y + a + b
x ∨ y − x = − x =
2
y − x + a + b
= = b ≥ 0
2

GEOMETRIC CHARACTERIZATION OF L -SPACES 9
1
and
x + y + a + b
x ∨ y − y = − y =
2
x − y + a + b
= = a ≥ 0.
2
Now let x, y ≤ z, where z ∈ Z. Denote
x = z − x ≥ 0, y = z − y ≥ 0.
1 1
Thus x − y = y − x . Therefore y − x = a − b. Lemma 3.10 implies that
1 1 1 1
y − a = x − b ≥ 0.
1 1
Further
x + y + x + y x + y + a + b
1 1
z − x ∨ y = − =
2 2
x + y − a − b
1 1
= = y − a ≥ 0.
1
2
This means that
x + y + a + b
x ∨ y = .
2
(cid:3)
In the same way we can prove equality (3.9). The proof is complete.
A Banach lattice X is said to be abstract L-space if
||x + y|| = ||x|| + ||y||
for all x, y ∈ X with x ∧ y = 0 (see [10, p. 14] and [11]).
Lemma 3.14. Z is an abstract L-space.
Proof. First we show that
0 ≤ x ≤ y ⇒ ||x|| ≤ ||y||;
||x|| = || |x| ||,
where |x| = x + x is the absolute value of x.
+ −
Let 0 ≤ x ≤ y. Then
||x|| = he, xi ≤ he, yi = ||y||,
i.e.
||x|| ≤ ||y||.
Further
|||x||| = ||x + x || = [x ♦x ] =
+ − + −
= ||x − x || = ||x||.
+ −
Hence Z is a Banach lattice.

10 N. YADGOROV, M. IBRAGIMOV, AND K. KUDAYBERGENOV
For x, y ≥ 0, using Lemma 3.11 we obtain
||x + y|| = he, x + yi = he, xi + he, yi = ||x|| + ||y||.
(cid:3)
This means that Z is an abstract L-space. The proof is complete.
Now Theorem 3.2 follows from Lemma 3.14 and [10, Theorem 1.b.2.].
Remark 3.15. The following observations were kindly suggested by the referee, to whom the authors
are deeply indebted.
Theorem 3.2 fails for complex spaces. Indeed, by [6, Theorem 2.11] for any finite von Neumann
algebra its predual is a neutral strongly facially symmetric space in which every maximal geometric
tripotent is unitary. However, that predual is not isometric to an L -space, for example for the algebra
1
B(H) of all bounded linear operators on the finite dimensional Hilbert space H of dimension at least 2.
The predual of a real JBW∗-triple is a neutral weakly facially symmetric space (see [3, Theorem 5.5]
and [6, Theorem 3.1]) which is not strongly facially symmetric. The strong facial symmetry of the predual
of a complex von Neumann algebra depends on the field being complex (see the proof of Corollary 2.9
in [6]). Indeed, if the predual of a non commutative real von Neumann algebra were a strongly facially
symmetric space, this would contradict Theorem 3.2 above.
Acknowledgments. The authors would like to thank the referee for valuable comments and suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] E. M. Alfsen and F. W. Shultz, Geometry of state spaces of operator algebras, Birkhauser, 2003.
[2] Sh. A. Ayupov and N. Zh. Yadgarov, Geometry of the state space of modular Jordan algebras,
Russian Acad. Sci. Izv. Math. 43 (1994), 581–592.
[3] E. M. Edwards and G. T. Ruttimann, The facial and inner structure of a real JBW∗-triple, Math.
Nach. 222 (2001), 159–184.
[4] Y. Friedman and B. Russo, A geometric spectral theorem, Quart. J. Math. Oxford, 37 (1986), 263–
277.
[5] Y. Friedman and B. Russo, Affine structure of facially symmetric spaces, Math. Proc. Camb. Philos.
Soc. 106 (1989), 107–124.
[6] Y. Friedman and B. Russo, Some affine geometric aspects of operator algebras, Pac. J. Math., 137
(1989), 123–144.
[7] Y. Friedman and B. Russo, Geometry of the Dual ball of the Spin Factor, Proc. Lon. Math. Soc.,
65 (1992), 142–174. 1992.
[8] Y. Friedman and B. Russo, Classification of atomic facially symmetric spaces, Canad. J. Math., 45
(1993), 33–87.
[9] M. M. Ibragimov, S. J. Tleumuratov and J. X. Seypullaev, Some geometric properties of a strongly
facially spaces, Methods Func. Anal. Topol. 11 (2005) 234–238.

GEOMETRIC CHARACTERIZATION OF L -SPACES 11
1
[10] J. Lindenstrauss and L. Tzafriri, Classical banach spaces, II. Function spaces. Springer, 1979.
[11] S. Kakutani, Concrete represantation of abstract L-spaces and mean the ergodic theorem, Ann. of
Math. 42 (1941), 523–537.
[12] M. Neal and B. Russo, State space of JB∗-triples, Math. Ann., 328 (2004) 585–624.
NATIONAL UNIVERSITY OF UZBEKISTAN, VUZGORODOK, 100174, TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN
E-mail address: yadgorovm@mail.ru
KARAKALPAK STATE UNIVERSITY, 230113 NUKUS, UZBEKISTAN
E-mail address: mukhtar nukus@mail.ru
KARAKALPAK STATE UNIVERSITY, 230113 NUKUS, UZBEKISTAN
E-mail address: karim2006@mail.ru