Sustainable Food System good practices 
 
       
Practice #2: Cold Chain Management at Hørkram and beyond 
                  (location icon) Denmark 
                (type of action icon) Business-led 
#cold chain   #certification   #effective logistics   #food safety   #distribution... 
 
1.  Background of Certification Scheme 
 
Hørkram Foodservice A/S is a wholesale distributor of the Danish Foodservice market, selling food and 
non-food products to kitchen professionals in Denmark from two locations. The products are procured 
from + 1.000 suppliers and go through 63.000 sqm modern storage facilities with different temperature 
zones adapted to the specific requirements for each product category before being distributed with 
Hørkram’s own trucks.  
Hørkram has held an IFS Logistics certification since 2009.  
IFS Logistics is applicable to both food and non-food products and covers logistics activities, including 
loading, unloading and transportation. 
An IFS certification shows that the certified company has established system suitable for ensuring food 
and/or product safety, and that it has considered and implemented customer specifications. 
The current level for the location in Sorø is at higher level with a score of 98,53 %. 
The product scope of the certification is  
1.  Storage   
a.  Food 
b.  Non-food 
2.  Transport 
a.  Food 
b.  Non-food 
   

 
The products that Hørkram distributes are: 
1.  Red and white meat, poultry, and meat products 
2.  Fish and fish products 
3.  Egg and egg products 
4.  Dairy products 
5.  Fruit and vegetables 
6.  Grain products, cereals, industrial bakery and pastry, confectionary, snacks 
7.  Combined products 
8.  Beverages 
9.  Oils and fats 
10. Dry products, other ingredients – HCP products -packging – other nonfood products 
 
2.  THE SYSTEM 
 
The system currently consists of 25 specified topics related to securing the quality and food safety of our 
logistics operation from controlling incoming products to cleaning of trucks and facilities. See attached list 
of contents of the system (Enclosure 1). 
For  topics  specifically  related  to  Cold  Chain  Management  we  refer  to  the  following  sections  of  the 
certification scheme: 
1.  Section 11: Receipt of goods 
2.  Section 12: Cooling (storage) 
3.  Section 16: Transport  
 
3.  THE PRACTICE 
In general, the aim of the certification is to manage any risk to the food safety of the products that we 
supply. To fulfil this aim, every “risk” area of the organization is managed by descriptions, risk analysis, 
procedures, instructions, flowcharts, rules, forms to fill in with data for control, logging of incidents and 
deviations. 
For the sections of the certification scheme relevant to cold chain, below please find an elaboration.  
Re. 1 – Receipt of Goods 
To secure that the products we receive are in accordance with our requirements the following tools are 
used as part of our quality system: 
❖  Procedure for receipt of goods 
❖  Form for registration of deviations 
❖  Instructions for minimum best before date 
❖  Procedure for receipt of meat and fish products 
❖  Form for receipt of meat and fish 

❖  Procedure for receipt of poultry products from other countries than Denmark 
❖  Procedure for international transport of perishable food items 
❖  Procedure for reading of log tags (specific customer) 
❖  Procedure for donation of surplus food items for feed (Sorø location only).  
Re. 2 - Cooling 
This section comprises the following tools: 
❖  Procedure for cooling 
❖  Overview of temperatures in the different production and storage rooms 
❖  Procedure of actions to take is the required temperatures are not observed  
❖  Form for registration of exceeding temperatures 
 
Re. 3 - Transport 
❖  Procedure for cooling – trucks 
❖  Form for temperatures on the trucks 
❖  Form for agreement with external service provider of transport (outbound) 
❖  Procedure for cleaning of trucks 
❖  Form for cleaning of trucks 
❖  Agreement on cleaning of trucks 
❖  Procedure for breakdown of truck 
❖  Form for deviations in connection with delivery of food items 
❖  Delivery and collection instructions for drivers 
❖  Procedure for return of goods from customers 
 
Although not all our suppliers are required to comply with the same certification, we manage them by 
requirements in our general terms of trade and by daily follow-ups on complaints and product defects. 
We also do supplier audits, according to below procedures (IFS system – section 9): 
 
09.00  Conditions regarding suppliers 
09.01  Procedure for approval of supplier 
09.01-1  Form for approval of supplier and food contact materials 
09.01-2  Scheme for supplier approval of food or food contact material 
09.02  Procedure for half-yearly supplier review 
09.02-1  Form for half-yearly supplier review 
09.03  Procedure for supplier audit 
09.03-1  Form for supplier audit 

| 09.00   |    | Conditions regarding suppliers                                |    |
|:--------|:---|:--------------------------------------------------------------|:---|
| 09.01   |    | Procedure for approval of supplier                            |    |
| 09.01-1 |    | Form for approval of supplier and food contact materials      |    |
| 09.01-2 |    | Scheme for supplier approval of food or food contact material |    |
| 09.02   |    | Procedure for half-yearly supplier review                     |    |
| 09.02-1 |    | Form for half-yearly supplier review                          |    |
| 09.03   |    | Procedure for supplier audit                                  |    |
| 09.03-1 |    | Form for supplier audit                                       |    |

09.04  Procedure for acquiring data sheets for chemicals 
09.05  Procedure for service providers 
09.05-1  Form for assessment of service providers SORØ ÅRHUS 
09.05-2  Form for assessment of service providers MALMØ 
09.06-1  Form for assessment of service providers MALMØ 
09.06-2  Agreement with external carriers inbound fixed MALMØ 
09.07  Procedure for customer events and mini fairs in SORØ 
09.08  Procedure for holding mini fairs in ÅRHUS 
09.09  Procedure for food contact materials 
09.09-1  CERAMICS Declarations of conformity 
09.09-2  CERAMICS Declarations of conformity 
09.09-3  GLASSWARE Declarations of Conformity 
09.09-4  METAL Declarations of Conformity 
09.09-5  WOOD AND BAGS Declarations of Conformity 
09.09-6  CARDBOARD AND PAPER Declarations of Conformity 
09.10  Procedure for Novel Food 
 
All suppliers of perishable products have temperature profile requirements. The temperature is checked 
when receiving deliveries of refrigerated and frozen goods. The temperature can be taken with an infrared 
thermometer, which, however, has a relatively large measurement uncertainty. If this shows a too high 
temperature, the temperature is checked with an insert thermometer by placing the probe between the 
items*) and wait until the temperature is stable. The temperature is recorded in the stamped form on the 
order requisition.  
*Doubtful questions arise regarding the product's temperature (+5-8 °C), we poke a hole in the consumer 
packaging by so-called destructive sampling and discard the product after inspection. Thermometers must 
be disinfected before and after sampling. 
If an inadequate temperature profile is detected, is it rejected outright.  
After reception, the temperature of the products are monitored during storage, transport, and delivery. 
In case data loggers are deployed, the information is stored into an information system. 
For keeping track of the cold chain on our own trucks, we use a PIM system. The system provides the 
temperature of delivered products during transport and delivery. 
 

| 09.04   |    | Procedure for acquiring data sheets for chemicals    |    |
|:--------|:---|:-----------------------------------------------------|:---|
| 09.05   |    | Procedure for service providers                      |    |
| 09.05-1 |    | Form for assessment of service providers SORØ ÅRHUS  |    |
| 09.05-2 |    | Form for assessment of service providers MALMØ       |    |
| 09.06-1 |    | Form for assessment of service providers MALMØ       |    |
| 09.06-2 |    | Agreement with external carriers inbound fixed MALMØ |    |
| 09.07   |    | Procedure for customer events and mini fairs in SORØ |    |
| 09.08   |    | Procedure for holding mini fairs in ÅRHUS            |    |
| 09.09   |    | Procedure for food contact materials                 |    |
| 09.09-1 |    | CERAMICS Declarations of conformity                  |    |
| 09.09-2 |    | CERAMICS Declarations of conformity                  |    |
| 09.09-3 |    | GLASSWARE Declarations of Conformity                 |    |
| 09.09-4 |    | METAL Declarations of Conformity                     |    |
| 09.09-5 |    | WOOD AND BAGS Declarations of Conformity             |    |
| 09.09-6 |    | CARDBOARD AND PAPER Declarations of Conformity       |    |
| 09.10   |    | Procedure for Novel Food                             |    |

4.  ACTORS 
 
The practice at this stage involves Hørkram employees (storage and transport) at the two distribution 
facilities located in Sorø and Aarhus.  
 
5.  REGULATORY ASPECTS 
 
To be able to supply food items as part of both private and public procurement calls, Hørkram has to 
comply with minimum set requirements for food items provision.  
The legislation requires that the company has written procedures that are based on the HACCP principles. 
The company must ensure that the written procedures are continuously updated. 
Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points (HACCP) is an internationally recognized method of identifying and 
managing  food  safety  related  risk and, when central  to  an  active  food  safety  program,  can  provide 
customers, the public, and regulatory agencies assurance that a food safety program is well managed. 
 
HACCP is a management system in which food safety is addressed through the analysis and control of 
biological, chemical, and physical hazards from raw material production, procurement and handling, to 
manufacturing, distribution and consumption of the finished product. 
Hørkram’s IFS logistics certification is built on top of a HACCP management system. 
 
6.  GEOGRAPHICAL COVERAGE 
 
Both of Hørkram’s two distribution centers are under the same IFS certification. The centers are located 
at Aarhus and Sorø, which operate at the national level, supplying food items to customers in the entire 
country. Average distribution haul from the distribution center to the end-customer is approx. 11 km 
 

 
Location of Hørkram’s distribution centers in Denmark.  
 
 
7.  CONTACT DETAILS 
 
Do get in touch with Hørkram’s head offices if you wish to adopt this solution for your business.   
Reference contact point: Ms. Annette Badsberg, Bid Manager , aba@hoka.dk 
 
www.hoka.dk 
 