About
In a nutshell: a private budgeting tool that can be self‑hosted.
Thisprojectisanattempttounderstandandcontrolmyownspendingbetterwithoutgivingmybank‑
ing/financialinfotoa3rdparty. Theappismeanttobeusedwith1login,andyoucanhosteasilyyour
own instance.
The app was designed by Iana Noda.
Features
Dashboard Thedashboardletsyouquicklyseehowyou’redoinginthecurrentmonth. Youcanseta
spend goal per month and/or per category. This is also where you quickly add individual expenses.
Insights The insights page lets you review any year or month in more detail.
1

History The history page lets you drill down into actual purchases, as well as do any tweaking
(e.g. changing category or deleting).
2

Importing Althoughyoucan’tconnectbankinginfo,youcanstillstreamlineenteringexpenses. The
CSVimportletsyouflexiblyimportexpensesfrombankexports. SavemultipleCSVparsingconfigura‑
tions for reuse so you can go straight from exporting to importing (see app/models/csv_config
.rb for details).
3

Fun and mobile friendly OnTrack has a light and fun voice that makes it a pleasure to use. The
entire app is also mobile friendly.
Installation
• Install with Homebrew
• Install on Ubuntu 16.04+
• Spin up an instance (for free) using the Heroku deploy button below. Heroku account is re‑
quired.
Creating a user
• bundle exec rails c to run Rails console
• User.create!(username: "...", password: "...") The username and pass‑
word will be hashed.
• If you ever need to change your username/password: User.first.update!(username:
"...", password: "...")
Hosting your own
I’d recommend using Heroku since it’s super simple (and free) to deploy a Rails app. Keep it awake
with my Heroku Pinger! Once your instance is deployed, do the “Creating a user” steps above after
spinning up Heroku’s console.
4

Usage and feedback
Feelfreetousethishoweveryou’dlike! Ifyouusethis,creditwouldbenicebutIdon’treallycarethat
much. I’mprimarilymaintainingthisformyownuse,soIwon’tbeveryresponsivetoissuessubmitted.
I will accept useful pull requests.
5