Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 1
Dynamic evolution of precise regulatory encodings creates the
clustered signature of developmental enhancers
1∗ 1
Albert Erives and Justin Crocker
1
Dept. of Biological Sciences, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, U.S.A.
∗
E-mail: Albert.J.Erives@Dartmouth.edu
(Dated: April 7th, 2010)
A morphogenicproteinknown as Dorsal patterns the embryonicdorsoventralbody axis of Drosophila by bind-
0102 rpA 7  ]EP.oib-q[  1v8201.4001:viXra
ing to transcriptional enhancers across the genome. Each such enhancer activates a neighboring gene at a
uniquethresholdconcentrationof Dorsal. The presenceof Dorsalbinding site clustersin these enhancersand
of similar clusters in other enhancers has motivated models of threshold-encoding in site density. However,
we found that the precise length of a spacer separating a pair of specialized Dorsal and Twist binding sites
determines the threshold-response. Despite this result, the functional range determined by this spacer ele-
ment as well as the role and origin of its surrounding Dorsal site cluster remained completely unknown. Here,
we experiment with enhancers from diverse Drosophila genomes, including the large uncompacted genomes
from ananassae and willistoni, and report three major interdependent results. First, we map the functional
range of the threshold-encodingspacer variable. Second, we show that the majority of sites at the cluster are
non-functional divergent elements that have been separated beyond the encoding’s functional range. Third,
we verify an evolutionary model involving the frequent replacement of a threshold encoding, whose precision
is easily outdated by shifting accuracy. The process by which encodings are replaced by newer ones is fa-
cilitated by the palindromic nature of the Dorsal and Twist binding motifs and by intrinsic repeat-instability in
the specialized Twist binding site, which critically impacts the length of the spacer linking it to Dorsal. Over
time, the dynamic process of selective deprecation and replacement of encodings adds to a growing cluster
of deadened elements, or necro-elements, and strongly biases local sequence composition. Necro-element
plaques are associated with mature enhancers that are older than 10 My but not with newer lineage-specific
enhancers that employ identical logic. We conclude that the clustered signature of most enhancers results
from long histories of selective “maintenance” of precise encodings via facile deprecation and equally facile
replacement.
Introduction which a gene product is made by a cell [1–11]. How-
ever, unlike the precise protein-encoding scheme,
Nothing Gold Can Stay
few general principles have emerged for regulatory
encoding. The identification of such principles
Nature’s first green is gold,
would facilitate understanding of genomic regulatory
Her hardest hue to hold.
DNAs and advance many areas of biological investi-
Her early leaf’s a flower;
gation.
But only so an hour.
One general feature of regulatory DNAs, which
Then leaf subsides to leaf.
include the transcriptional enhancers, is the use
So Eden sank to grief,
of combinatorial codes of transcription factor (TF)
So dawn goes down to day,
binding sites [12]. This feature allows an enhancer to
Nothing gold can stay.
activate its gene only if it binds a specific combina-
tion of different TF proteins. A less understood gen-
—Robert Frost, New Hampshire (1923)
eral feature is the clustering of multiple binding sites
How genetic information is encoded in DNA is a for a single TF operating at an enhancer [13]. This
central question in biology. In many cases, natural unexplained cluster signature has motivated several
selection acts efficaciously on regulatory DNA se- bioinformatic screens that exploit binding site den-
quences, which specify the precise conditions under sity to identify functional enhancers [14,15]. Such
© 2010 Erives and Crocker. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original authors are
credited. This article is archived in the Quantitative Biology section of arXiv.org, which is maintained by Cornell University
Library, and was first presented in a platform session at the 51st Annual Drosophila Research Conference, April 8th, 2010, in
Washington, DC, USA.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 2
methods detect both functional enhancers and non- have formally referred to DNA sequences that both
functional sequences. Moreover, these methods are drive expression in the lateral embryonic ectoderm
not yet predictive of the exact responses encoded by and contain this particular collection of specialized
active enhancers bearing site clusters. binding sites as Neurogenic Ectodermal Enhancers,
or NEEs [7,37,38].
Concentration-specific threshold responses are a
property of most regulatory DNAs that function We found that the NEE at the vnd locus, or
through recruitment of DNA-binding factors [16]. NEE , is conserved in Drosophila and mosquitos.
vnd
However, developmental enhancers that read classi- As such it was present in the latest common ances-
cal morphogen concentration gradients [17] are ideal tor of dipterans ∼240–270 million years ago (Mya)
subjects in decoding regulatory DNA sequences, and [39,40], or at least >200 Mya [41]. We found that
their functional features. Different enhancers with conserved “canonical” NEEs occur at the rho, vnd,
variably-dense clusters of binding sites for the same brk, and vn loci across the Drosophila genus [7].
TF are each responsive to their own unique thresh- As such, the canonical NEEs were acquired prior
old concentration. Such DNAs can be studied com- to Drosophila diversification over 40 Mya [7]. We
paratively to identify the variables that encode the also found a more recently evolved member of this
concentration threshold setting. In principle, such enhancer class, NEE , in the sog locus of the
sog
a variable might be encoded in one of several non- melanogaster subgroup, which began diverging ∼20
exclusive categories: i) the formulaic combination Mya [7]. Thus, NEE-type regulatory sequences have
of adjacent binding sites for TFs acting synergisti- been evolving at various unrelated loci within a pe-
cally; ii) the range of sequences that determine the riod spanning the last ∼250 My.
affinity or allostery of a DNA-bound TF (functional
NEEs function by recruiting both Dorsal, a rel-
grammars); and iii) the higher-order organizational
homology domain (RHD)-containing TF, and its
arrangement of binding sites (functional syntaxes).
synergistic bHLH co-activator Twist, whose expres-
Two well-studied systems of morphogen- sion mirrors the Dorsal morphogen gradient [19,42–
responsive enhancers are those that read the Bi- 46]. In addition to having sites for Dorsal and Twist,
coid and Dorsal morphogen concentration gradients NEEs possess sites for Su(H) and Snail. Su(H) is a
that pattern the anterior/posterior (A/P) and dor- highly-conserved TF that mediates transcriptional
sal/ventral (D/V) axes of the Drosophila embryo, responses to Notch/Delta signaling [47–50], while
respectively [18–29]. Like most enhancers, these Snail is a highly-conserved C H zinc-finger TF that
2 2
DNAs contain clusters of binding sites, which in represses activation in the mesoderm [51, 52]. In
this case correspond to those for Bicoid, Dorsal, D. melanogaster and closely related species, NEEs
and their DNA-binding co-factors. This cluster- also have a binding site for Dip-3 (Dorsal interacting
ing has prompted several complex “cluster code” protein-3) [37], a Dorsal-binding protein required for
models that integrate site number, quality, and den- Dorsal/Twist synergistic activation and D/V pat-
sity parameters to determine the threshold read- terning [53–56]. Besides these specialized binding
out [30–32]. Paradoxically however, the apparent sites, NEEs share distinct organizational features
phenotypic robustness of this “cluster code” to mu- pertaining to site placement, spacing, and polar-
tational divergence has been taken to mean that ity [37]. These observations suggest that NEEs form
this full parameter set is simultaneously flexible and a distinct set of sequences that “read-out” the Dor-
determinative [33–36]. sal morphogen gradient at various thresholds in the
lateral regions of the embryo through specific protein
To address how concentration-threshold re-
complexes composed of Dorsal, Twist, Snail, Su(H)
sponses are encoded in Dorsal target enhancers, we
and their co-factors.
asked whether there exist a unique, subset of spe-
cialized TF binding sites in co-clusters of sites for Recently, we determined that the specialized
Dorsal, Twist, and Suppressor of Hairless [Su(H)] NEE-type binding sites for Dorsal and Twist have
[37]. Specialized binding motifs, as identified across a unique function in setting the threshold for activa-
equivalent enhancers present in a genome and across tion [7]. In the NEEs from D. melanogaster, D. pseu-
related lineages, do not manifest the full-range of se- doobscura, and D. virilis, we found that: i) the pre-
quences known to be bound by these factors and cise length of a spacer DNA, which separates these
may signify regulatory sub-functionalizations. With well-defined Dorsal and Twist binding sites, encodes
this approach, we identified two different specialized the concentration threshold setting; ii) natural se-
binding sites for Dorsal, as well as specialized bind- lection has acted on the length of this spacer in dif-
ing sites for Twist and Su(H) [37]. Since then, we ferent lineages of the Drosophila genus to adjust the

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 3
threshold; and iii) these selective cis-regulatory ad- the cluster as the motif consensus for a TF is re-
justments have been performed at all NEEs across laxed. Thus, a cis-spectral binding cluster remains
a given genome, as would be expected if they are well-defined with increasing degeneracy of the bind-
all co-evolving to a common change in the trans- ing motif. For example, if we use a motif spectrum
morphogen gradient [7]. While this study identified of increasingly degenerate binding motifs character-
a heritable feature that encodes different responses istic of Dorsal binding sites, we identify additional
to Dorsal, it did not address its full functional range matching sequences locally within the vicinity of the
nor the function of the many other Dorsal binding module, thus preserving the definition of the cluster
site variants, which constitute the clusters observed (Fig. 1, bottom rows of localized clustering).
at these enhancers. As such, it was not clear whether We defined three specialized cis-element motifs
these additional Dorsal motifs were necessary and/or that are associated with the cis-spectral clusters of
sufficient for setting the gradient threshold, partici- canonical NEEs across Drosophila: SUH/Dα, Dβ,
pating in activation or repression, or any other reg- and E(CA )T (see Fig. 1). These motif signatures cor-
ulatory function. respond to specialized versions of more general bind-
Here we test several wild-type and ing motifs for Dorsal, Twist, Snail, and Su(H). Im-
experimentally-modified NEEs from five divergent portantly, the specialized motifs typically describe a
species of Drosophila: D. melanogaster, D. ananas- single site at each cis-spectral cluster.
sae, D. pseudoobscura, D. willistoni, and D. virilis.
Despite the numerous binding site variants in
Importantly, D. ananassae and D. willistoni repre-
Dorsal cis-spectra, there are only two distinct and
sent the largest assembled Drosophila genomes and
separate, specialized Dorsal binding site motifs at
are less derived than the smaller, compact genomes each NEE, here called Dα and Dβ. The special-
of the melanogaster subgroup, which may have lost ized Dorsal binding motif Dα partially overlaps an
important signatures indicative of past evolutionary
overly-determined and polarized Su(H) binding site
history [57]. Using this broad data set, we narrow
SUH (Fig. 1). In D. melanogaster, SUH is polarized
the many explanations of binding site clustering in the same direction as the µ site, a specialized bind-
down to a single, unexpected, but ultimately predic- ing site for Dip-3 [37]. Furthermore, while the µ ele-
tive hypothesis of concentration-threshold encoding,
ment appears to be absent in distant Drosophila lin-
and explain several perplexing constraints on the
eages, SUH is maintained in a polarized state, even
specialized sites of NEEs and their relative organi-
after turnover events [7].
zation. We show that complex enhancer clustering is
In contrast, the specialized Dorsal binding motif
a signature that ages over time through a dynamic CA T
Dβ is located uniquely within ∼20 bp of the E( )
evolutionary process involving facile selection for
element, the spacing to which encodes the thresh-
optimal threshold readouts and equally facile loss
old response. Furthermore, an invariant length-
and/or selective deprecation of former threshold- CA T
asymmetry in this nearly palindromic E( ) mo-
encodings. This process, which we term dynamic
tif consistently points to Dβ although Dβ itself
deprecation, produces several non-functional signa-
is not polarized. Importantly, we have never ob-
tures that obscure the precise morphogen threshold-
served any Dorsal binding site variant to be more
encoding mechanism that we functionally map and CA T
tightly linked to the E( ) element than the Dβ
confirm in this study. We conclude that the clustered CA T
element. The E( ) element itself is a special-
signature observed in most enhancers is produced ′
ized CA-core E-box (5 -CANNTG) with an additional
by the dynamic evolutionary maintenance of the ′ CA T
T, i.e. the sequence 5 -CACATGT. This E( ) ele-
accuracy of precise threshold-encodings.
ment is partially explained as the superimposition
of binding preferences for Twist and Snail. Activat-
ing Twist:Daughterless bHLH heterodimers bind the
Results
′ YA
YA-core E-box 5 -CAYATG, or E( ), while the Snail
′
repressor binds the motif 5 -SMMCWTGYBK [51, 58].
Canonical NEEs are marked by cis-spectral
Thus, we predicted that such a co-functional site
clusters
may originate via selection for the superimposed mo-
′
We found that binding site clusters at NEEs are tifs, which corresponds to the sequence 5 -SCACATGY.
characterized by a certain “cis-spectral” signature, This superimposed Twist/Snail binding motif is al-
CA T ′
and refer to such clusters simply as cis-spectra most identical with the observed E( ) motif, 5 -
(Fig. 1). Binding site constituents of cis-spectra are CACATGT.
revealed specifically within or immediately around We will refer to the three arranged elements of

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 4
CA T
the polarized E( ) site, the spacer, and an un- of the neuroectoderm in D. willistoni embryos. In
polarized Dβ site as an E-to-D encoding. Using this general, D. willistoni NEEs drive slightly narrower
terminology, we will show that functional NEE mod- expression patterns in D. melanogaster than their
ules need be composed only of one E-to-D encoding, counterpart D. melanogaster NEE reporters, which
supported by a nearby generic Su(H) site. We will may indicate that they are tuned to higher threshold
show that the E-to-D sequence is the sole reposi- responses (Fig. 4).
tory of the threshold encoding variable at each NEE
To determine whether the specialized Dorsal
module, and that cis-spectral clusters and certain
binding sites Dα and Dβ are embedded in clusters
specialized sites are byproducts accumulated in ma-
of Dorsal binding site variants as they are in other
ture enhancers. Last we will show that an intrinsic
lineages, we identified all sites in these sequences
CA T
mutational property of the E( ) elements facili-
matching a Dorsal motif spectrum and found ex-
tates the rapid selection of new E-to-D encodings.
tremely dense Dorsal cis-spectra in the NEEs of D.
willistoni (Figs. 5–6). As quantified below, these are
some of the densest clusters yet seen in NEEs of the
Canonical NEEs from D. willistoni genome are
Drosophila genus. To ascertain whether the special-
enriched in cis-spectra
ized Dorsal motifs are maintained as unique copies in
To better understand the functional importance each NEE from D. willistoni, or whether additional
of multiple variant binding sites for Dorsal and Dorsal binding variant sites within each cluster also
its co-factors within canonical NEEs, we analyzed match these specialized motifs as would be expected
the D. willistoni genome, which is the largest as- by random neutral drift [59,60], we applied our path-
sembled Drosophila genome (224 Mb) [57]. The finding method to identify and characterize the most
study of large genomes is important because rel- specialized Dorsal binding motifs within their cis-
atively compact genomes may have lost DNA sig- spectral clusters [37] (also see Supplement Part I).
natures indicative of past evolutionary processes. We find that the Dα site occurs once in each NEE
The D. willistoni lineage is an early branch of (Fig. 5). Furthermore, Dα continues to overlap the
the same Sophophora subgenus that includes the Su(H) binding site at this particular specialized Dor-
melanogaster subgroup, and represents ∼37 My of sal binding site. This property is unique to Dα in
evolutionary divergence since its common ancestor canonical NEEs across the Drosophila genus. Sim-
with D. melanogaster, whose genome has been sec- ilarly, the Dβ of D. willistoni site occurs only once
ondarily compacted (Fig. 2). in each NEE (Fig. 6). As expected, Dβ is the clos-
CA T
est variant Dorsal binding site adjacent to E( )
To identify the canonical NEE set from D. willis-
(Fig. 6). The Dβ consensus motif for the canonical
toni, it is sufficient to query the genome for all
NEEs of D. willistoni is nearly identical with the cor-
800 bp sequences containing the three motifs given
by SUH/Dα, Dβ, and E(CA )T , without imposing any responding motif in other previously-characterized
syntactical constraints, such as linked Dorsal/Twist lineages (Table 1).
binding sites or polarized SUH elements. Such a The Dorsal cis-spectral clusters of NEEs from
query identifies only the four canonical NEEs of D. willistoni are associated with another feature
Drosophila, and these all conform to the full syn- that is interesting in light of the reduced genomic
tactical rule set, despite significant levels of sequence deletion rates relative to D. melanogaster: the D.
divergence. We also verified that these NEE-bearing willistoni NEEs appear to be enriched in CA-satellite
loci are expressed in the neurogenic ectoderm of D. sequence. Given that the E(CA )T sequence, 5′ -
willistoni embryos by whole-mount in situ hybridiza- CACATGT, is composed entirely of CA-dinucleotide re-
tion (Fig. 3 A–D). peats, we speculated whether the Dorsal cis-spectra
CA T
We cloned DNAs encompassing the NEE se- of NEEs are overlaid with a similar E( ) spec-
quences of D. willistoni and tested them for en- tral cluster. In support of this idea, we found sev-
hancer activity on a lacZ reporter stably integrated eral lengthy CA-satellite tracts across the canonical
into multiple independent lines of D. melanogaster. NEE set of D. willistoni (Fig. 7). Almost all of these
Whole-mount in situ hybridization of these embryos are associated with specific constituents of Dorsal
with an anti-sense lacZ probe showed that the D. cis-spectra. Conversely, almost all constituent sites
willistoni enhancers drive lateral ectodermal expres- of Dorsal spectra are associated with prominent CA-
sion in D. melanogaster embryos (Fig. 3 E–H). These satellite tracts. For example, the cis-spectral clus-
results demonstrate that these are functional en- ter of the NEE of D. willistoni has an expanded
vn
hancers present in loci expressed in lateral regions CA-satellite tracts associated with divergent Dβ ele-

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 5
ments at ∼340–400 bp and again at ∼580–630 bp, which is intact and tightly spaced, is sufficient for
while the D. willistoni NEE also has an expanded the complete threshold-response, while the second
rho
CA-satellite tracts coordinated to divergent Dβ ele- E-to-D encoding, which is expansively-spaced to a
ments at ∼130–150 bp and again at ∼270–290 bp slightly divergent Dβ element, is non-functional. We
(Fig. 7). Last, the NEE sequence, which is the refer to the component sites of the second encoding
vnd
descendant of the oldest known NEE because it is as dead elements, or necro-elements, and label them
CA T CA T
found in mosquitos, is characterized by the greatest N-E( ) and N-Dβ. While the N-E( ) sequence
number of lengthy CA-satellite tracts in D. willistoni is intact, inspection of this N-Dβ sequence shows
(Fig. 7). that it has diverged somewhat from the genus-wide
Dβ consensus (Fig. 9F).
Constituents of cis-spectra represent non- These results indicated that Dorsal cis-spectra
functional necro-elements and their associated CA-satellite tracts are relic E-
to-D encodings that were once functional but even-
In the NEE module of D. willistoni, we detected
vnd tually deprecated and replaced during lineage evo-
the loss of one of two E-to-D encodings that are
lution. While the evolution of new encodings will
present and intact in the NEE sequences from
vnd sometimes occur via selection of spacer length vari-
the D. melanogaster, D. pseudoobscura, and D. vir-
ants defined by existing elements, at other times
ilis genomes [7,37]. The first E-to-D encoding has
it will occur via selection of new replacement sites
a tighter spacer compared to the second, distantly-
associated with new spacer lengths. Three impor-
spaced E-to-D encoding. Furthermore, the Dorsal
tant features of E-to-D encodings increase the ca-
binding site at this second encoding is a divergent
pacity for selection of replacement encodings. The
Dβ element (Fig. 1). In the D. willistoni lineage, the CA T
first feature is the palindromic nature of the E( )
CA T
E( ) element of this second divergent encoding ex- and Dβ elements, which allows new E-to-D encod-
panded on both sides and then split apart (Fig. 8A,
ings to arise from the selection of a single emer-
inverted CA-satellite palindromic pair #4). This
gent site that is located on the other side of its
is unambiguously an inactivating mutation of the
coordinating partner element in an existing encod-
Twist binding element. Furthermore, the NEE of
vnd ing (a leapfrog). The second feature is that the
D. willistoni is marked by several other such palin-
E-to-D spacer range is broad-ranged and thus en-
dromic tracts (numbered in Fig. 8A), of which the
dows functionality to sub-optimal encodings. The
CA T
intact but also expanded E( ) site is the leftmost third feature is that CA-dinucleotide satellite se-
site in a series of increasingly-lengthy, split, inverted
quence is susceptible to repeat expansions and con-
palindromic CA-satellite repeats (Fig. 8B). These in-
tractions across the Drosophila genus [61–63]. We
creasingly expanded CA-satellite palindromes are as- assume that the E(CA )T sequence 5′ -CACATGT is dy-
sociated with Dorsal binding site variants that are
namically unstable in NEEs because this element
increasingly divergent from the Dβ consensus motif is composed entirely of CA-repeats. In support of
(Fig. 8C). CA T
this, we found that intact E( ) elements in the
While the D. willistoni NEE sequence has lost NEEs of several Drosophila genomes are frequently
vnd
CA T
the second E( ) site through repeat expansion repeat-expanded beyond the core heptamer such
′
and separation of the two palindromic moieties, we that it matches the general pattern given by 5 -
did not know whether this site functioned in species (CA) T(GT) , where n ≥ 2 and m ≥ 1 (Table 2).
n m
in which it is still intact. We therefore tested two This is pronounced particularly in the larger, un-
different fragments contained within a “full-length” compacted D. ananassae, D. willistoni, and D. vir-
949 bp enhancer sequence from the vnd locus of D. ilis genomes, (Table 2). These observations are of
melanogaster (Fig. 9A). We tested a 300 bp frag- utmost significance: spacer length variants produced
ment that contains the first E-to-D encoding spaced by an intrinsic repeat instability of the E(CA )T ele-
by 10 bp, and a 266 bp fragment that contains the ment will drive different threshold-responses. This
second E-to-D encoding spaced by 20 bp. Both frag- eventuality would also explain the highly invariant
ments overlap and contain in common the extended nature of the E(CA )T sequence. Newly-selected re-
SUH/Dα site (Fig. 9A). placement Twist/Snail binding sites will evolve at
We found that the 300 bp fragment works just target sequences most closely resembling the dual-
as well as the 947 bp fragment (Fig. 9 B, C, and functioning site predicted by superimposed bind-
E) while the 266 bp fragment hardly works at all ing preferences (Fig. 10). Initially, such an emer-
(Fig. 9D and 4E). Thus, the first E-to-D encoding, gent site will be associated with a suboptimal

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 6
spacer. However, random neutral drift to the spe- each of 4 genomes: D. melanogaster, D. pseudoob-
CA T
cific E( ) sequence would result in the availability scura, D. willistoni, and D. virilis. All of these en-
of spacer length variants via CA-satellite repeat ex- hancers are active in the same embryonic nuclei as
pansion/contraction. Thereafter, frequent occasions the NEEs and thus constitute a well-matched con-
for selection of spacer variants produced by such a trol group. We found that while all 16 of these A/P
site would result in the apparent “constraint” of the enhancers possess evolving clusters of Bicoid bind-
Twist element. ing site spectra (data not shown), none of them pos-
The evolution of threshold readouts via dynamic sess the elevated CA-satellite levels that characterize
deprecation and replacement of encodings, as facili- canonical NEEs from these same species (Fig. 11).
tated by instrinsic E(CA )T instability, makes several Thus, there is a tremendous sequence bias that is
testable predictions. First, a dynamic deprecation unique to canonical NEEs across the genus and in
model is supported if longer CA-satellite tracts in D. stark contrast to the sequence composition of both
willistoni NEEs are loosely associated with specific their genomes and other non-NEE enhancer clusters.
components of Dorsal cis-spectra, especially when Furthermore, this NEE compositional bias is related
they are spaced beyond the functional range of the to specific functional elements employed by NEEs.
spacer element. Second, necro-element accumula- Having found we could identify the extent of Dor-
tion may progress in a clock-like fashion followed by sal cis-spectra with confidence, we then checked its
neutral divergence of these sites. Thus cis-element potential to encode or influence Dorsal concentra-
spectra for both Dorsal and Twist binding motifs tion threshold read-out of NEEs. For example, we
should be associated with mature NEEs that are checked the relation between threshold-readout and
canonical to the lineage, but not in newer NEEs the density of Dorsal halfsites in a region anchored
that might have arisen more recently. Third, we ±480 bp from Dβ (Fig. 12A). For this we measured
should find that threshold readout is correlated to the stripe width at 50% egg length as measured by
spacer length but not to binding site density. Fourth, the number of nuclei expressing the reporter gene
we should be able to remove deprecated encodings from the ventral border of expression up to the dor-
without affecting the threshold readout (as in Fig. 9 sal border. We also found no relation between Dorsal
C and E). Conversely isolated deprecated encodings binding site densities and threshold-encodings after
should not possess lower thresholds compared to the trying diverse other descriptors of a Dorsal binding
intact enhancer (as in Fig. 9 D and E). site (data not shown). Identical densities of Dorsal
halfsites, degenerate full-sites, and more complete
full-sites are present in different enhancers that read-
Canonical NEEs across Drosophila are enriched
out different Dorsal concentration thresholds and
in necro-element spectra
vice versa.
To address the generality of CA-satellite accu- In contrast, if we plot the length of the E-to-D
mulation in NEEs across the genus, we checked spacers for NEEs with unambiguous E-to-D encod-
CA T
the percentage of CA-satellite in NEEs from D. ings (i.e., encodings with single intact E( ) and
melanogaster, D. pseudoobscura, D. willistoni, and Dβ elements) and except those from the dorsally-
D. virilis relative to their genomic background lev- repressed vnd loci, we see a well-defined, hump-
els (Table 3). These analyses consistently show that shaped curve, whose peak activity tops at around
CA-satellite is enriched in NEEs above genomic back- 7 bp and falls on either side of this maximum. The
ground rates. Importantly, this elevated level is not spacer elements from the consistently high-threshold
due to the presence of intact E(CA )T motifs, which NEE sequences across the genus obey a similar,
vnd
constitute only a minor fraction of CA-repeat se- albeit depressed, curve because of one additional
quence in NEEs (Table 3). regulatory input (data not shown). Thus, the ele-
To address the possibility that elevated CA- vated CA-satellite content and its associated Dorsal
cis-spectra are consistent with the central hypothe-
satellite composition is a feature common to de-
sis that the sequence composition of these enhancers
velopmental enhancers, we then looked at sev-
has been shaped by a long history of repeated dep-
eral canonical enhancers that respond to the Bi-
recation and compensatory selection of E-to-D en-
coid morphogen gradient, which patterns the ante-
codings by a process which has been active for more
rior/posterior (A/P) axis. We identified the hunch-
than 200 My in the case of the NEE sequence,
back (hb) enhancers, the giant (gt) posterior en- vnd
and more than 40 My at other canonical NEEs.
hancers, the Kruppel (Kr) enhancers, and the well-
studied even-skipped (eve) stripe 2 enhancers from Given the extent of cis-spectral signatures as-

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 7
sociated with Dorsal and Twist binding elements creases with age, we were curious about the extent
in mature NEEs, we asked whether the special- of cis-spectral signatures in younger NEEs. We pre-
ized Dα site, which overlaps an unusually special- viously documented a new NEE sequence at the sog
ized Su(H) binding site, might also be a Dβ necro- locus of D. melanogaster [7]. The D. melanogaster
element that was conveniently turned into a Su(H) NEE sequence has a CA-dinucleotide content of
sog
site. To address this question, we first compared the 14.4%, which is on par with highest levels seen in
Dα and Dβ consensi motifs across all five divergent A/P enhancers from all lineages but is mid-range for
Drosophila lineages for which we functionally tested NEEs from D. melanogaster (compare with Fig. 11B
NEEs in D. melanogaster (Table 1, Fig. 13A). Re- points in the A/P box). However, because the CA-
markably, we find that the second half of the Dα has content of NEEs from D. melanogaster may have
diverged across the genus faster than the first half. been secondarily reduced, we therefore wanted to
This second half is the portion that does not overlap query uncompacted Drosophila genomes with a pa-
the Su(H) binding site. Unlike, the slight lineage- rameter set that is constrained only by the mini-
specific variations of Dβ, Dα motif divergence can mal molecular requirements. Thus, we queried the
be characterized as increasingly degenerate when de- two largest Drosophila genome assemblies, which
parting from the ancestral Dα motif, which is closest corresponded to D. ananassae (231.0 Mb) and D.
to a Dβ motif itself. willistoni (235.5 Mb). Both of these species are
ophophora
To test whether the Su(H) binding site is itself in the S subgenus, which includes D.
functional and perhaps the principal reason for per- melanogaster.
sistence of the “ghost” Dα motif, we specifically mu- Of the 1 kb genomic windows centered on all
tated the Su(H)-specific portion of the SUH/Dα site Dβ instances in any given genome and contain-
in the NEE of D. melanogaster (Fig. 13 A and C). ing E(CA )T anywhere in that window, we identified
rho
This specific mutation appears to weaken the activa- the subset of these sequences that also contained a
tion response of the enhancer without affecting the generic (“un-specialized”) Su(H) binding site as well
specific threshold setting (Fig. 13 B–C). Because we as linked Dorsal and Twist binding elements. The
CA T
have shown a general tendency of functional E( ) generic Su(H) site replaces the composite extended
elements to have expanded beyond the heptamer se- motif that described an overly-determined SUH el-
CA T
quence (Table 2), and of deprecated E( ) elements ement and the overlapping Dα ghost site. Using
to have experienced runaway expansion into longer this set of minimal criteria, we nonetheless were able
tracts (Figs. 7–8), we suspect that this process tends to identify the canonical NEE repertoires for each
to push away combinatorial enhancer elements, such species.
as Su(H) binding sites. In this context, selection
From the D. ananassae genome, we identified,
may favor new Su(H) binding sites that are closer
cloned and tested both a functional set of canonical
to the current functional encoding. Conveniently,
NEEs (Fig. 14), and a new NEE at the Delta (Dl)
deprecated N-Dβ sequences are similar to sequences
locus (Fig. 15). Delta encodes a ligand for the Notch
matching the Su(H) binding motif and thus provide
receptor, whose signaling is relayed by the Su(H) TF
a convenient set of target sites for re-evolving more
itself [49, 64]. In D. melanogaster embryos, Delta
proximal Su(H) sites.
is expressed in a narrow lateral stripe in the me-
sectoderm and ventral most row of the neurogenic
ectoderm using sequences that are unrelated to the
Newly evolved NEEs are not enriched in cis-
NEE sequence of D. ananassae [50].
spectra Delta
Like the NEE sequence, which matured in the
sog
Our results on the canonical NEEs of the four diver- melanogaster subgroup, the NEE sequence in
Delta
gent lineages of D. melanogaster, D. pseudoobscura, D. ananassae has not yet accumulated either CA-
D. willistoni, and D. virilis NEEs demonstrate that satellite content or the Dorsal cis-spectra character-
much of their sequence composition corresponds to istic of necro-element plaques (Fig. 15A). Nonethe-
relic deprecated encodings. This pertains not only to less, this enhancer is functional in D. melanogaster
the sequences in between intact Dorsal, Twist/Snail, embryos (Fig. 15B). Inspection of its Su(H) bind-
and Su(H) binding motifs but to most of the rec- ing site reveals that it does not overlap a ghost Dα
ognizable and intact TF sites and variants as well. motif, which demonstrates again that Dα is not re-
Because we predict that necro-element accumula- quired (Fig. 15C). This is consistent with the inter-
tion is a neutral signature related to the number of pretation that Dα motifs are deprecated Dβ mo-
past threshold adaptations, whose number likely in- tifs exapted into functional SUH elements at ma-

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 8
ture NEEs, whose sequence compositions have been NEEs of Drosophila. SUH appears to influence the
biased by long histories of necro-element accumula- strength of activation without affecting the Dorsal
tion. concentration-threshold response. This site is spe-
The NEE enhancer has a spacer of 3 bp, and cialized in mature NEEs but not in more recently
Delta
occupies the low-end of the threshold mapping func- evolved NEEs. This unusual turnover process for
tion (Fig. 12). Therefore, because we characterized Su(H) sites may be necessitated by the tendency of
both high and low threshold NEEs that have evolved CA-satellite expansion to act as a “conveyor belt”
more recently in the Delta and sog loci of D. ananas- pushing out coordinating elements such as the Su(H)
sae and D. melanogaster, respectively, without much binding site, but leaving a convenient path of dep-
necro-element accumulation, the cis-spectra of ma- recated elements that are easily exapted into closer
ture NEEs are likely unrelated to function. Instead, Su(H) sites.
the absence of the necro-element plaques suggest a We found that functional NEEs can be derived
shorter period of evolutionary maintenance, consis- from truncated fragments of mature NEEs that lack
tent with their phylogenetic distribution. necro-elements while continuing to encode the cor-
rect threshold setting. Also, functional NEEs have
evolved more recently at non-canonical loci with-
Discussion
out having yet accumulated the characteristic necro-
element plaques seen in older NEEs. Such NEEs
In this study of regulatory DNAs from the
bear Su(H) sites that do not extend to deprecated,
Drosophila genus, we found that a certain Dorsal-
ghost Dorsal binding sites.
threshold encoding mechanism maps a spacer length
Last, we found a smooth continuum between in-
of 3–15 bp, which links a pair of well-defined Dor-
tact NEE elements and increasingly divergent dep-
sal and Twist binding sites, onto one well-defined
recated necro-elements in these enhancers. Further-
dorsal border of expression that is 5–15 nuclei past
more, because the extreme range of this continuum
the ventral border of the neurogenic ectoderm. The
is associated with the age of the enhancer, we infer
CA T
specialized Twist-binding E( ) sequence is a con-
that necro-element accumulation begins with each
strained motif that satisfies binding preferences for
NEE origination and is continuously co-extant with
both the Twist activator and the Snail mesodermal
its adaptive maintenance. This has led us to a richly-
repressor. This sequence is also a palindromic CA-
predictive yet parsimonious model of NEE evolution
satellite sequence that is prone to CA-dinucleotide
that we call dynamic deprecation (Fig. 16). With in-
repeat expansions that alter the precise threshold
creasing time, the background sequence composition
setting spacer. Natural selection acts continuously
of enhancers is profoundly altered and eventually
CA T
to exploit E( ) instability to adapt the precise,
dominates the nature of binding site sequences be-
threshold-setting spacers between adjacent and in-
cause it provides a highly-biased ground state from
tact Dorsal and Twist binding elements. This pro-
which new sites are exapted.
cess may also accelerate site turnover, because it
would frequently necessitate stabilizing selection of
compensatory threshold settings in response to this Defining necro-elements, cis-spectra, and dep-
intrinsic instability. Thus, evolutionary maintenance recated necro-elements. We have used the term
of optimal NEE function involves the clock-like pro- necro-element initially to describe intact or nearly
duction of dead Dorsal and Twist binding elements, intact binding sites occurring within well-defined
which we call necro-elements. Necro-element accu- clusters but which are no longer relevant in the cur-
mulation is the major determinant of sequence com- rent threshold encoding. This term can be applied
position in enhancers that have matured beyond a to sites subjected to dynamic deprecation, includ-
certain age (>10 My). Further genomic sampling ing those that are deprecated solely through changes
of taxa will allow refinement of the necro-element in syntax. However, because there is no clear di-
clock, and ascertain whether it reaches a saturation viding line between potentially-functional binding
point for the most ancient enhancers. This ques- sites deprecated by syntax and increasingly diver-
tion increases the need to sequence larger genomes gent sites, we have chosen to expand the use of
that are not compressed secondarily by high deletion “necro-element” to refer to the entire continuum
rates [65]. constituting a clustered plaque of necro-elements.
We found that the specialized Su(H) bind- We call such clusters cis-spectra in order to dis-
ing site SUH is exapted from deprecated, non- tinguish them from functional “clusters” of binding
functional Dorsal binding sites in all canonical sites. Cis-spectra are well-defined operationally as

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 9
motif clusters that remain distinct from background of function via neutral drift. This is an unexpect-
genomic sequence as the degeneracy of the matching edly novel evolutionary mechanism for generating
motif is increased and additional, presumably older, apparent regulatory redundancy. In this context, we
relic sites are revealed. In this context, we used the suggest that redundant “shadow enhancers”, which
term motif spectrum to refer to the bioinformatic have been observed at several Dorsal target loci in
set of motif descriptors that detect cis-spectra for a the D. melanogaster genome [66], should be incorpo-
given TF. rated into the same dynamic deprecation framework
when appropriate. Selection may adapt an exist-
The use of the prefix necro- rather than the pre-
ing threshold encoding or transition its focus to a
fix pseudo- is justified by several important distinc-
new threshold encoding that is located either within
tions that are peculiar to necro-elements. Etymo-
the same enhancer or elsewhere in the locus. Multi-
logically, the Greek root ψευδο- means ‘false’, while
ple such events are likely to pepper the idiosyncratic
the Greek root νεκρο- means ‘dead’ and more accu-
histories of different lineages at different times. In
rately connotes ‘loss of function’. This is an im-
this context, shadow enhancers may be defined as
portant distinction because biological systems are
out-moded enhancers, which were either redundant
rich in functional dissimulation (e.g., mimicry and
when replaced by distant low threshold enhancers, or
camouflage on an organismal scale, but also extend-
actively deprecated by selection until their threshold
ing to viral oncogenes that dissimulate normal cellu-
was at least higher than a newer optimal low thresh-
lar genes, and potentially true pseudo-elements that
old enhancer located elsewhere in the same locus.
function as decoy DNA elements to sequester a tran-
scription factor). Biologically, the chosen term must
encompass in its definition both deprecated and non- Summary and implications. In principle, cis-
deprecated elements, as well as both non-functional
spectral plaques of necro-elements should accumu-
and functionally-redundant elements. Convention-
late in all complex eukaryotic enhancers that encode
ally, the usage of the pseudo- prefix for sequence
key regulatory variables in a precise syntax. The ex-
lengths on the length-scale of cis-elements is un-
tent of this clustering would then be determined by
wieldy because it is used almost exclusively for recog-
the age of the enhancer, and the number or rate of
nizable homologs of protein-coding genes with clear
replacement adaptations over this time. While many
inactivating mutations (e.g., internal stop codons,
of the intensely studied enhancers of Drosophila have
and frameshifts). Necro-elements cannot always be
corresponded to early embryonic enhancers that are
identified by sequence alone because they can be ren-
evolutionarily sensitive to changes in egg size and
dered functionally redundant or non-functional by
morphology, they are also proving useful in untan-
selection on syntax.
gling the molecular and evolutionary aspects of en-
We also used the term deprecation to connote hancer biology.
additional information as to the probable role of se- In this evolutionary context, the biology of necro-
lection in producing a necro-element. A deprecated element spectra of D/V enhancers appears to be di-
necro-element is a useful distinction to character- rectly applicable to A/P enhancers responsive to the
ize a necro-element that has undergone selection for Bicoid morphogen gradient system. Evolution of
attenuated or complete loss of function in connec- egg size and developmental timing during embryo-
tion with the selection of a replacement threshold- genesis is likely to place evolutionary demands on
encoding located either at the enhancer or elsewhere both A/P and D/V morphogen gradient systems,
in the locus. Thus, deprecation implies that selec- which are operating simultaneously in the same cells.
tion was active in removing an epistatic relation- While we have shown that Dorsal binding site den-
ship between two conflicting threshold-encodings. sity does not correlate with threshold encoding, oth-
Selection may favor such an outcome when the ers have shown that Bicoid binding site strength in
pre-deprecated functional element encodes a lower- the heavily-clustered A/P enhancers does not corre-
threshold than the positively selected replacement late with A/P position of activity [67]. Under the
encoding. In such cases, a low threshold encod- dynamic deprecation theory of enhancer evolution,
ing masks the function of any high threshold en- this paradox is explained if the majority of Bicoid
coding under positive selection and must engender binding site variants at such clusters represent necro-
active selective deprecation. On the other hand, if a elements deprecated by mutations affecting the site
high-threshold encoding is being selectively replaced itself, its coordinating site(s), and/or their syntac-
by a low threshold encoding, we expect no active tical relation. This interpretation can be confirmed
deprecation forces. Instead, we expect gradual loss by future studies identifying the minimal molecular

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 10
requirements for encoding variable Bicoid-response at multiple loci in precise but varied functional con-
thresholds. figurations. Understanding this complex relation be-
One important implication for current studies is tween molecular encoding systems and their complex
evolutionary histories may prove useful in gauging
that motif descriptors and algorithmic motif predic-
the intrinsic adaptive potential of specific systems
tors should be constructed over a judiciously-chosen
set of functionally-equivalent sites across a genome, subjected to future climate change [74].
rather than on the continuum of necro-element spec-
tra at a cluster. Such clusters are often exploited Materials and Methods
statistically to increase the number of “example ele-
ments”. Such approaches lead to degenerate motifs Embryonic experiments. Animal rearing, P-
describing both extant functional elements and sur- element mediated transformations, embryonic col-
rounding deprecated sequences. Newer approaches lections, staging, anti-DigU probe synthesis, and
that are both alignment-free and wary of exploiting whole-mount in situ hybridizations were conducted
the abundance of related sequences will do better at as previously reported [7].
distinguishing functional elements from evolutionary
artifact [37,68]. Probes for whole-mount in situ hybridization in
The conceptual re-framing of the functional evo- D. willistoni embryos. Primers for probe synthe-
′
lution of enhancers overturns a common assumption sis are as listed here. rho: 5 -CCGCC TTTGC CTATG
′
that all binding site variations within an enhancer ACCGT TATAC AATGC and 5 -Pr-TTAGG ACACA CCCAA
are functional and/or subtly necessary. This as- GTCGT GC, where Pr = the T7 promoter sequence
′ ′
sumption has been directly responsible for the im- 5 -CCGCC TAATA CGACT CACTA TAGGG. vn: 5 -CCGCC
′
pression that the “cluster code” is “flexible”, by TAGTG ACGAC AACAA CAACA GTAGC and 5 -Pr-ATTTT
′
which is meant that enhancer activity is robust to CACTCA CAGCC ATTTT CACC. vnd: 5 -CCGCC CTAGT
′
mutational disruption [33–36]. However, whether CCGGA TAGCA CTTCG C and 5 -Pr-CGGCT GCCAC
′
these site sequences are flexible or not flexible is only ATGTT GATAG G. brk: 5 -CCGCC AACAA AGTTC GTCGG
′
a productive question if the observed sequences are CAACA ACG and 5 -Pr-CATGG TGAGG TGAGG ACTAT
functional in some way. In contrast, our results have GG.
supported the existence of a precise encoding scheme
that uses only a limited subset of sites in the clus- Whole genome sequence analysis. Current ver-
ter [37]. Mutational variation in the organization of sions for all genomes were downloaded from Flybase
these specialized sites produces a specific and well- (www.flybase.org) and these correspond to assembly
mapped range of expression phenotypes [7]. Indeed, versions: dmel ver5.22, dana ver1.3, dpse. ver2.6,
because this precise encoding scheme turns brittle dwil ver1.3, and dvir ver1.2. Various whole-genome
when extended past its functional range, selective queries were conducted using shell scripts composed
deprecation is facilitated. This view is further en- of shell, perl, grep, and wc UNIX commands and are
riched by considering the complex macroevolution- available upon request. Separate queries were con-
ary processes that result when taxa and lineages per- ducted for NEE signatures and CA-satellite content.
sist through several expansions caused by non-static Special genome files were processed for counting per-
ecological/climatic conditions [69–72]. Regulatory cent content of a given motif. We call these “∗.HNF”
evolution is likely to underlie many of the stabiliz- files because they are header and N-free files; these
ing and adaptive changes associated not only with having been replaced by newline characters.
these climate-driven historical events but future cli-
mate changes as well [73].
Acknowledgments
The potential for gene regulatory evolution is
likelier when encoding schemes for relevant regu- The authors thank Michael Dietrich, Mark McPeek,
latory traits are broad-ranged functions that map Alysha Heimberg, Kevin Peterson, Lisa Fleischer,
genotype (enhancer sequence) to phenotype (expres- Ilya Ruvinsky, and Bryan Kolaczkowski for read-
sion profile). Precise codes provide the additional ing and commenting on earlier versions of the
category of syntax on which natural selection can manuscript. The authors also thank Ann Lavanway
act. However, a broad or evolutionarily-varied phe- for technical assistance. Completion of this work was
notypic range may be a simple consequence of molec- supported by an NSF CAREER award to A.E. (IOS
ular mechanisms that are employed ontogenetically 0952743).

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 11
References
1. Prud’homme B, Gompel N, Carroll SB (2007) Emerging principles of regulatory evolution. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 104 Suppl 1: 8605-12.
2. Carroll SB, Prud’homme B, Gompel N (2008) Regulating evolution. Sci Am 298: 60-7.
3. Wang X, Chamberlin HM (2002) Multiple regulatory changes contribute to the evolution of the
caenorhabditis lin-48 ovo gene. Genes Dev 16: 2345-9.
4. Wittkopp PJ, Haerum BK, Clark AG (2004) Evolutionary changes in cis and trans gene regulation.
Nature 430: 85-8.
5. Marcellini S, Simpson P (2006) Two or four bristles: functional evolution of an enhancer of scute in
drosophilidae. PLoS Biol 4: e386.
6. McGregor AP, Orgogozo V, Delon I, Zanet J, Srinivasan DG, et al. (2007) Morphological evolution
through multiple cis-regulatory mutations at a single gene. Nature 448: 587–590.
7. Crocker J, Tamori Y, Erives A (2008) Evolution acts on enhancer organization to fine-tune gradient
threshold readouts. PLoS Biology 6: e263.
8. Prabhakar S, Visel A, Akiyama JA, Shoukry M, Lewis KD, et al. (2008) Human-specific gain of
function in a developmental enhancer. Science 321: 1346-50.
9. Williams TM, Selegue JE, Werner T, Gompel N, Kopp A, et al. (2008) The regulation and evolution
of a genetic switch controlling sexually dimorphic traits in drosophila. Cell 134: 610-23.
10. Wittkopp PJ, Haerum BK, Clark AG (2008) Regulatory changes underlying expression differences
within and between drosophila species. Nat Genet 40: 346-50.
11. Shirangi TR, Dufour HD, Williams TM, Carroll SB (2009) Rapid evolution of sex pheromone-
producing enzyme expression in drosophila. PLoS Biol 7: e1000168.
12. Arnone MI, Davidson EH (1997 May) The hardwiring of development: organization and function of
genomic regulatory systems. Development 124: 1851–1864.
13. Wunderlich Z, Mirny LA (2009) Different gene regulation strategies revealed by analysis of binding
motifs. Trends Genet 25: 434-40.
14. Berman BP, Nibu Y, Pfeiffer BD, Tomancak P, Celniker SE, et al. (2002) Exploiting transcription
factor binding site clustering to identify cis-regulatory modules involved in pattern formation in the
drosophila genome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99: 757–762.
15. Markstein M, Markstein P, Markstein V, Levine MS (2002) Genome-wide analysis of clustered dorsal
binding sites identifies putative target genes in the drosophila embryo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99:
763–768.
16. Ptashne M (2004) A genetic switch: phage lambda revisited. Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y.: Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory Press, 3rd ed edition.
17. Wolpert L (1989) Positional information revisited. Development 107 Suppl: 3–12.
18. Anderson KV, Bokla L, Nusslein-Volhard C (1985) Establishment of dorsal-ventral polarity in the
drosophila embryo: the induction of polarity by the toll gene product. Cell 42: 791–798.
19. Jiang J, Kosman D, Ip YT, Levine M (1991) The dorsal morphogen gradient regulates the mesoderm
determinant twist in early drosophila embryos. Genes Dev 5: 1881-91.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 12
20. Small S, Kraut R, Hoey T, Warrior R, Levine M (1991) Transcriptional regulation of a pair-rule stripe
in drosophila. Genes Dev 5: 827-39.
21. Ip YT, Levine M, Small SJ (1992) The bicoid and dorsal morphogens use a similar strategy to make
stripes in the drosophila embryo. J Cell Sci Suppl 16: 33–38.
22. Norris JL, Manley JL (1992) Selective nuclear transport of the drosophila morphogen dorsal can be
established by a signaling pathway involving the transmembrane protein toll and protein kinase a.
Genes Dev 6: 1654–1667.
23. Reinitz J, Mjolsness E, Sharp DH (1995) Model for cooperative control of positional information in
drosophila by bicoid and maternal hunchback. J Exp Zool 271: 47-56.
24. Jaeger J, Surkova S, Blagov M, Janssens H, Kosman D, et al. (2004) Dynamic control of positional
information in the early drosophila embryo. Nature 430: 368-71.
25. Moussian B, Roth S (2005) Dorsoventral axis formation in the drosophila embryo–shaping and trans-
ducing a morphogen gradient. Curr Biol 15: R887-99.
26. Gregor T, Tank DW, Wieschaus EF, Bialek W (2007) Probing the limits to positional information.
Cell 130: 153-64.
27. Gregor T, Wieschaus EF, McGregor AP, Bialek W, Tank DW (2007) Stability and nuclear dynamics
of the bicoid morphogen gradient. Cell 130: 141-52.
28. Reinitz J (2007) Developmental biology: a ten per cent solution. Nature 448: 420-1.
29. Gregor T, McGregor AP, Wieschaus EF (2008) Shape and function of the bicoid morphogen gradient
in dipteran species with different sized embryos. Dev Biol 316: 350-8.
30. Papatsenko D, Levine M (2005) Quantitative analysis of binding motifs mediating diverse spatial
readouts of the dorsal gradient in the drosophila embryo. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102: 4966-71.
31. Zinzen RP, Senger K, Levine M, Papatsenko D (2006) Computational models for neurogenic gene
expression in the drosophila embryo. Curr Biol 16: 1358-65.
32. Janssens H, Hou S, Jaeger J, Kim AR, Myasnikova E, et al. (2006) Quantitative and predictive model
of transcriptional control of the drosophila melanogaster even skipped gene. Nat Genet 38: 1159-65.
33. Brown CD, Johnson DS, Sidow A (2007) Functional architecture and evolution of transcriptional
elements that drive gene coexpression. Science 317: 1557–1560.
34. Hare EE, Peterson BK, Iyer VN, Meier R, Eisen MB (2008) Sepsid even-skipped enhancers are func-
tionally conserved in drosophila despite lack of sequence conservation. PLoS Genet 4: e1000106.
35. Liberman LM, Stathopoulos A (2009) Design flexibility in cis-regulatory control of gene expression:
synthetic and comparative evidence. Dev Biol 327: 578–589.
36. Cameron RA, Davidson EH (2009) Flexibility of transcription factor target site position in conserved
cis-regulatory modules. Dev Biol 336: 122-35.
37. Erives A, Levine M (2004 Mar 16) Coordinate enhancers share common organizational features in the
drosophila genome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101: 3851–3856.
38. Crocker J, Erives A (2008 Nov) A closer look at the eve stripe 2 enhancers of drosophila and themira.
PLoS Genet 4: e1000276.
39. Grimaldi DA, Engel MS (2005) Evolution of the insects. Cambridge ; New York: Cambridge University
Press. http://www.loc.gov/catdir/toc/cam051/2004054605.html.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 13
40. Bertone MA, Courtney GW, Wiegmann BM (2008) Phylogenetics and temporal diversification of the
earliest true flies (insecta: Diptera) based on multiple nuclear genes. Systematic Entomology 33:
668-687.
41. Wiegmann BM, Trautwein MD, Kim JW, Cassel BK, Bertone MA, et al. (2009) Single-copy nuclear
genes resolve the phylogeny of the holometabolous insects. BMC Biol 7: 34.
42. Ip YT, Park RE, Kosman D, Yazdanbakhsh K, Levine M (1992) dorsal-twist interactions establish
snail expression in the presumptive mesoderm of the drosophila embryo. Genes Dev 6: 1518–1530.
43. Ip YT, Park RE, Kosman D, Bier E, Levine M (1992) The dorsal gradient morphogen regulates stripes
of rhomboid expression in the presumptive neuroectoderm of the drosophila embryo. Genes Dev 6:
1728–1739.
44. Jiang J, Levine M (1993) Binding affinities and cooperative interactions with bhlh activators delimit
threshold responses to the dorsal gradient morphogen. Cell 72: 741–752.
45. Gonzalez-Crespo S, Levine M (1993) Interactions between dorsal and helix-loop-helix proteins initiate
the differentiation of the embryonic mesoderm and neuroectoderm in drosophila. Genes Dev 7: 1703–
1713.
46. Szymanski P, Levine M (1995) Multiple modes of dorsal-bhlh transcriptional synergy in the drosophila
embryo. EMBO J 14: 2229–2238.
47. Bailey AM, Posakony JW (1995) Suppressor of hairless directly activates transcription of enhancer of
split complex genes in response to notch receptor activity. Genes Dev 9: 2609–2622.
48. Ray RP, Schupbach T (1996) Intercellular signaling and the polarization of body axes during drosophila
oogenesis. Genes Dev 10: 1711–1723.
49. Lecourtois M, Schweisguth F (1997) Role of suppressor of hairless in the delta-activated notch signaling
pathway. Perspect Dev Neurobiol 4: 305-11.
50. Morel V, Le Borgne R, Schweisguth F (2003) Snail is required for delta endocytosis and notch-
dependent activation of single-minded expression. Dev Genes Evol 213: 65-72.
51. Gray S, Szymanski P, Levine M (1994) Short-range repression permits multiple enhancers to function
autonomously within a complex promoter. Genes Dev 8: 1829-38.
52. Cowden J, Levine M (2002) The snail repressor positions notch signaling in the drosophila embryo.
Development 129: 1785-93.
53. Flores-Saaib RD, Courey AJ (2000) Regulation of dorso/ventral patterning in the drosophila embryo
by multiple dorsal-interacting proteins. Cell Biochem Biophys 33: 1-17.
54. Bhaskar V, Valentine SA, Courey AJ (2000) A functional interaction between dorsal and components
of the smt3 conjugation machinery. J Biol Chem 275: 4033-40.
55. Bhaskar V, Courey AJ (2002) The madf-bess domain factor dip3 potentiates synergistic activation by
dorsal and twist. Gene 299: 173-84.
56. Ratnaparkhi GS, Duong HA, Courey AJ (2008) Dorsal interacting protein 3 potentiates activation by
drosophila rel homology domain proteins. Dev Comp Immunol 32: 1290-300.
57. Clark AG, Eisen MB, Smith DR, Bergman CM, Oliver B, et al. (2007) Evolution of genes and genomes
on the drosophila phylogeny. Nature 450: 203–218.
58. Castanon I, Von Stetina S, Kass J, Baylies MK (2001) Dimerization partners determine the activity
of the twist bhlh protein during drosophila mesoderm development. Development 128: 3145-59.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 14
59. Kimura M (1968) Evolutionary rate at the molecular level. Nature 217: 624-6.
60. Ohta T (1973) Slightly deleterious mutant substitutions in evolution. Nature 246: 96-8.
61. Schl¨otterer C, Harr B (2000) Drosophila virilis has long and highly polymorphic microsatellites. Mol
Biol Evol 17: 1641-6.
62. Harr B, Zangerl B, Schl¨otterer C (2000) Removal of microsatellite interruptions by dna replication
slippage: phylogenetic evidence from drosophila. Mol Biol Evol 17: 1001-9.
63. Harr B, Schl¨otterer C (2000) Long microsatellite alleles in drosophila melanogaster have a down-
ward mutation bias and short persistence times, which cause their genome-wide underrepresentation.
Genetics 155: 1213-20.
64. Lecourtois M, Schweisguth F (1998) Indirect evidence for delta-dependent intracellular processing of
notch in drosophila embryos. Curr Biol 8: 771-4.
65. Peterson BK, Hare EE, Iyer VN, Storage S, Conner L, et al. (2009) Big genomes facilitate the com-
parative identification of regulatory elements. PLoS One 4: e4688.
66. Hong JW, Hendrix DA, Levine MS (2008) Shadow enhancers as a source of evolutionary novelty.
Science 321: 1314.
67. Ochoa-Espinosa A, Yucel G, Kaplan L, Pare A, Pura N, et al. (2005) The role of binding site clus-
ter strength in bicoid-dependent patterning in drosophila. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 102: 4960-4965.
68. Leung G, Eisen MB (2009) Identifying cis-regulatory sequences by word profile similarity. PLoS One
4: e6901.
69. Hewitt G (2003) Evolution on planet earth: the impact of the physical environment, Amsterdam:
Academic Press, chapter 18: Ice ages, species distributions, and evolution. pp. 339-361.
70. Hewitt GM (2004) The structure of biodiversity - insights from molecular phylogeography. Front Zool
1: 4.
71. Hewitt GM (2004) Genetic consequences of climatic oscillations in the quaternary. Philos Trans R
Soc Lond B Biol Sci 359: 183-95; discussion 195.
72. McPeek MA (2008) The ecological dynamics of clade diversification and community assembly. Am
Nat 172: E270-84.
73. Overpeck JT, Bartlein PJ, Webb T 3rd (1991) Potential magnitude of future vegetation change in
eastern north america: Comparisons with the past. Science 254: 692-695.
74. Klausmeyer KR, Shaw MR (2009) Climate change, habitat loss, protected areas and the climate
adaptation potential of species in mediterranean ecosystems worldwide. PLoS One 4: e6392.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 15
Figures
Figure 1. Organization of specialized elements within Dorsal cis-spectra of canonical NEEs.
Shown are the specialized sites embedded within the Dorsal cis-spectra of the D. melanogaster NEE
vnd
sequence, which is representative of canonical NEEs at the rho, vn, vnd, and brk loci of the Drosophila
genus. Numerous lines of evidence in this study demonstrate that the Dorsal cis-spectra are specific to
mature NEEs (>40 My old), non-functional, and likely produced by dynamic deprecation of precisely
spaced Dorsal and Twist sites. Dorsal cis-spectra are defined by a motif spectrum of increasingly
degenerate Dorsal binding motifs. All instances of the motifs listed in the key are shown in the graphic.
The motif sequences in all of the figures and text are written according to IUPAC DNA convention: S =
[CG], W = [AT], R = [AG], Y = [CT], K = [GT], M = [CT], B = [CGT], D = [AGT], H = [ACT], V = [ACT], N = [ACGT],
where nucleotides in brackets are equivalent. All Dorsal binding sites, motifs, and variants will be depicted
′ CA T
with the best halfsite on the 5 - side regardless of its polarity to E( ) .

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 16
Figure 2. Drosophila phylogeny with tested NEE sequences.
In this study, we expand our previous studies to two genomes not marked by secondarily-derived compact
genome sizes. These genomes correspond to the D. ananassae and D. willistoni lineages (blue). We also
expand our analyses by testing additional mutated versions of these and previously cloned enhancers.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 17
Figure 3. Functional NEEs from D. willistoni.
Functional NEEs from D. willistoni occur in canonical loci that are also expressed in the neurogenic
ectoderm. A–D) NEE-bearing loci in D. willistoni are expressed endogenously in the neuroectoderm of
stage 5(2) embryos as shown by in situ hybridization with an anti-sense RNA probe to exonic sequences.
E–H) NEE sequences from D. willistoni can drive a lacZ reporter gene in transgenic D. melanogaster
embryos as shown by in situ hybridization with an anti-sense RNA probe to lacZ. Embryos in all figures
are depicted with anterior pole to the left, and dorsal side on top. Image labels indicate the species of the
embryo, and the gene or reporter being detected. All reporters are in D. melanogaster embryos.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 18
Figure 4. D. willistoni NEEs are set to higher concentration thresholds than D.
melanogaster.
See text.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 19
Figure 5. Dorsal cis-spectra in canonical D. willistoni NEEs contain a single Dα site.
Constituents of Dorsal cis-spectra in D. willistoni NEEs are visualized by matches to Dorsal halfsites (base
D halfsite, pale blue) and degenerate full sites (base D, light blue) as shown in the key. One such site at
each canonical NEE matches the Dα consensus (purple). This same site overlaps a Su(H) binding site
(SUH, red), which occurs on the top strand at each NEE. For efficient referencing across the set, all NEEs
from D. willistoni are aligned and centered on the unique Dα site, plus or minus 400 bp, unless otherwise
stated.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 20
Figure 6. Dorsal cis-spectra in canonical D. willistoni NEEs contain a single Dβ site.
One Dorsal binding site variant in each cluster matches the Dβ consensus (dark blue). This specialized Dβ
CA T
site is the closest (<30 bp) Dorsal binding site variant to the E( ) element (green), which is a binding
site for the Dorsal co-activator Twist, and the Snail mesodermal repressor. Sites matching this specialized
Dorsal binding motif Dβ are distinct from the Dα elements (numbered purple labels).

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 21
Figure 7. Canonical NEEs from D. willistoni are enriched with CA-satellite.
All canonical NEEs from the D. willistoni genome also are enriched in CA-satellite, almost as much as the
NEE sequence, which was present in the latest common ancestor of dipterans (see text). Furthermore,
vnd
the longest such tracts are associated with divergent Dβ halfsites (pale blue). The NEE cis-spectra has
vn
expanded CA-satellite tracts associated with ghost Dβ elements at ∼340–400 bp and again at ∼580–630 bp,
while NEE also has expanded CA-satellite tracts coordinated to ghost Dβ motifs at ∼130–150 bp and
rho
again at ∼270–290 bp. Such signatures are consistent with the hypothesis that much of the clustering is
CA T
evidence of past deprecation events between precisely spaced Dβ and E( ) elements. Enhancers are
aligned on the unique SUH/Dα site at position 400 bp (see Fig. 5).

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 22
Figure 8. The vnd NEE from D. willistoni is enriched in split, palindromic CA-satellite.
Analysis of the vnd NEE sequence in the relatively uncompacted D. willistoni genome indicates a long
CA T
history of instability at E( ) elements. Such signatures could be variably interpreted as past selection for
CA T
new E( ) elements or new optimized spacer lengths, intrinsic mutational bias for repeat expansions,
and/or both of these combined. A) Split, palindromic CA-satellite tracts are present in the NEE of D.
vnd
′ ′
willistoni as visualized by matches to short CA-satellite motifs (5 -CACA or 5 -ACAC). The larger palindromic
CA-satellite tracts are numbered and their sequences shown in B. B) The exact sequence composition of the
CA T
CA-satellite indicates that these were once intact E( ) elements as found at the presumed functional site
CA T
located in palindrome #1 (green box). However, even the intact E( ) shows recent expansion in this
lineage. Such expansions or contractions relative to the Dβ motif alter the precise length of the linking
spacer and consequently also alter the precise Dorsal concentration threshold of the enhancer. C)
Increasingly longer, and presumably older CA-tracts are associated with increasingly divergent Dorsal
binding site variants as shown. For each such Dorsal binding site variant listed the Hamming Distance
(HD) or number of mismatches (red letters) from Dβ is indicated.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 23
Figure 9. The second E-to-D encoding within NEE was deprecated prior to divergence of
vnd
the Drosophila genus.
A) Unlike D. willistoni, the NEE in D. melanogaster has two apparently intact threshold-encodings,
vnd
one of which is coordinated by a 10 bp spacer (narrow yellow column), and another that is coordinated by
a 20 bp spacer (wide yellow column). Motifs follow the key in Fig. 1 except the Dorsal binding spectra are
shaded with decreasing intensity as degeneracy increases. The 947 bp “full-length” fragment encompasses
the entire 720 bp shown in the graphic. Two smaller tested fragments are shown in dark bold lines. Both
of these overlap and include the SUH/Dα site (red/blue stack). B) The 947 bp NEE “full-length”
vnd
enhancer sequence drives a normal pattern of lacZ expression. C) The 300 bp NEE subfragment drives
vnd
a similar pattern as the full-length version, despite the absence of the second coordinated Dorsal/Twist
binding site pair. D) The 266 bp NEE subfragment fails to drive a robust lateral stripe of lacZ
vnd
expression at any threshold. Faint staining is occasionally seen in a lateral patch towards anterior pole. E)
Quantification of the stripe width over several embryos for each construct depicted in A–D shows that the
full-length enhancer is not measurably different than the 300 bp fragment containing a single E-to-D
CA T
encoding. F) The Dorsal binding site coordinated by 20 bp to the second E( ) element is divergent (red
letters) from the Dβ consensus for D. melanogaster. This D. melanogaster Dβ consensus matches the Dβ
consensi in other lineages more closely than a D. melanogaster consensus made with the 20 bp coordinating
Dorsal binding site variant.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 24
CA T
Figure 10. E( ) versus Twist and Snail binding motifs in D. willistoni NEEs.
The simple superimposition of motifs representing binding preferences for Twist bHLH complexes and the
Snail C H zinc-finger transcriptional repressor, results in a predicted dual motif that is similar but not
2 2
CA T CA T
identical to the observed E( ) motif. Because the E( ) motif appears to be subject to repeat
expansions and contractions, as seen in Table 2, and because this would result in threshold-modifying
variants, we believe that the peculiar difference between the predicted dual site and the observed invariant
site, is strong support for our evolutionary model of dynamic deprecation of encodings via CA-satellite
instability. These motifs are depicted here.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 25
CA T
Figure 11. High levels of E( ) fragments have accumulated in canonical NEEs across the
genus.
′ ′
The percentage of sequence that is composed of either 5 -CA dinucleotides or 5 -CAC trinucleotides is
graphed for several orthologous groups of enhancers from D. melanogaster, D. pseudoobscura, D. willistoni,
and D. virilis. Each window of NEE sequence is taken ±480 bp from Dβ for each species. Each window of
an A/P enhancer is a 960 bp sequence centered around the Bicoid binding site cluster. A) Each
orthologous set of NEEs is boxed separately to visualize enrichment relative to other groups. In contrast to
the canonical NEEs, the Bicoid binding site clusters of several canonical A/P enhancers at the eve, gt, Kr,
and hb loci are not associated with high CA-satellite content. All 16 of these enhancers fit within the blue
box shown in the graph. B) Same as A, except NEEs are boxed by species. Because D. willistoni and D.
virilis represent lineages from each of the subgenera of Drosophila, this graph highlights the
secondarily-derived, reduced state of CA-satellite in D. melanogaster NEEs.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 26
CA T
Figure 12. The spacer between the E( ) and Dβ encodes the threshold-response to the
Dorsal morphogen concentration gradient, and is independent of the number or density of
variant Dorsal binding sites.
A) The number of Dorsal halfsites in the ∼1 kb window ± 480 bp from Dβ from diverse NEEs of varied
age, lineage, and locus, is not predictive of the the precise Dorsal concentration threshold readout. B) In
CA T
contrast, the precise spacer length between the E( ) and Dβ elements is predictive (red trendline,
second order polynomial) of the precise threshold readout over a range from 3 bp to 15 bp. Vertical axes
for both graphs in A and B are aligned for cross-referencing.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 27
Figure 13. The Dα motif is a N-Dβ necro-element that was exapted into a Su(H) binding site.
A) Alignment of the lineage-specific consensi for Dα shows that the portion overlapping the Su(H) binding
site portion is the least divergent. The second half of the Dorsal binding site is also increasingly degenerate
(black struck-out letters) in comparison to other lineages. Such a signature of divergence is characteristic
of drift. Based on this pattern of divergence and the activities of more recent NEEs, we conclude that Dα
is non-functional and represents a deprecated Dβ site exapted into SUH. Also shown are the wild-type and
mutated sequences of this site tested in the NEE backbone from D. melanogaster. B–C) Relative
rho
activities of NEE -driven reporters differing by the presence (B) or absence (C) of the Su(H) binding
rho
site, via a mutation that leaves the Dorsal site intact. The SUH element is required for activity levels but
not the precise Dorsal concentration threshold encoding. This suggests that Su(H) acts after Dorsal and
Twist threshold-activation.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 28
Figure 14. Canonical NEEs from D. ananassae are functional in D. melanogaster embryos.
See text.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 29
Figure 15. A newly evolved NEE at the Delta locus of D. ananassae has not yet
accumulated a necro-element cluster.
A) The genome of D. ananassae contains a recently-evolved enhancer NEE as well as older, canonical
Delta
NEEs, such as NEE (shown). Dorsal cis-spectra are associated with the canonical NEEs but not with
vnd
the NEE sequence, despite employing the essential NEE logic of an E-to-D encoding that is near a
Delta
Su(H) binding site. Brackets in the NEE sequence indicate the boundaries of the fragment tested in
Delta
D. melanogaster and shown in B. B) The NEE module from D. ananassae drives a narrow stripe of
Delta
expression spanning the ∼5 nuclei of the mesectoderm and ventral neurogenic ectoderm in D. melanogaster
embryos. C) The SUH element does not overlap a ghost Dα site. This suggests that the SUH element in
this recently-evolved NEE sequence is the original site that has not yet needed to re-evolve or track closer
to the latest, functioning E-to-D encoding. CA-satellite is defined here as sequences matching two
CA-dinucleotide repeats or longer (given by the UNIX regular expression: A?(CA){2,}C?.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 30
Ancestor 4
θ = [D]
MED
θ encoding
4 
Ancestor 3
θ = [D]
LO
n
o
θ encoding
i 3 
t
u
l
o
v
E
  Ancestor 2
e
g
a
θ = [D]
e MED
n
i
L
θ encoding
2 
Ancestor 1
θ = [D]
HIGH
θ encoding
1 
Figure 16. Dynamic deprecation produces necro-element clusters over time.
The evolutionary maintenance of precise threshold encodings via dynamic deprecation and re-selection of
replacement encodings can be inferred for Neurogenic Ectodermal Enhancers (NEEs). This process
produces necro-element clusters (starred, faded boxes) during the course of lineage evolution. Depicted are
binding elements for Dorsal (blue), Twist (green), and Su(H) (red). Spacer elements (orange) separate the
Dorsal and Twist elements by a fixed distance, whose length determines the precise threshold encoding
required for a given embryo type occurring during lineage evolution. Because genes, such as vnd, which are
expressed in the neurogenic ectoderm must be expressed over the same number of cells despite evolutionary
changes in the size of the embryo (right column), selection will favor NEEs with new, compensatory,
threshold encodings (left column). There are multiple other reasons for selecting new threshold encodings,
but these are not depicted here for simplicity. New encodings arise either by selection on variant spacer
lengths (e.g., evolution of threshold #4), or by the selection of new replacement sites defining preferred
spacers (thresholds #1–3). Su(H) sites in particular can also be exapted from relic Dorsal necro-elements
when selection favors proximity to the current encoding (see threshold #4) . Over time, these processes
produce a cluster of necro-elements at an enhancer. Increasingly, this prominent signature heavily
influences future evolutionary kinetics.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 31
Tables
Table 1. Specialized Dorsal motifs in Drosophila NEEs.
Species Motif Consensus over canonical NEEs
D. melanogaster SUH/Dα CGTGGGAAAWDCSM
D. melanogaster Dβ NVVSGGAAABYCCM
D. ananassae SUH/Dα CGTGGGAAWWDCBM
D. ananassae Dβ BSVNGGAAABYCCC
D. pseudoobscura SUH/Dα CGTGGGAAWWWHBV
D. pseudoobscura Dβ BSMSGGAAABYCCH
D. willistoni SUH/Dα YGYGGGAAWWDCSM
D. willistoni Dβ DKVSGGAAABYCCH
D. virilis SUH/Dα CGTGGGAAWWWVBV
D. virilis Dβ KNVSGGAAABYCCH
DNA consensi for the indicated elements of canonical NEEs in each species are listed in IUPAC code.
Canonical NEEs are located in vnd, rho, vn, brk loci. Underlined letters refer to the more degenerate site of
two equivalent positions across the Dα and Dβ consensi for that lineage.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 32
Table 2. List of intact or nearly intact encodings in tested NEEs.
CA T1 2
No. Enhancer E( ) Spacer Dβ
1 878 bp D. mel. NEE wt CACATGT 5 bp GGGAAATTCCC
rho
2 302 bp D. mel. NEE wt min CACATGT 5 bp GGGAAATTCCC
rho
3 302 bp D. mel. NEE SUH ∆ CACATGT 5 bp GGGAAATTCCC
rho
4 912 bp D. mel. NEE sp -1 bp CACATGT 4 bp CGGAAATTCCC
vn
5 913 bp D. mel. NEE wt CACATGT 5 bp CGGAAATTCCC
vn
6 914 bp D. mel. NEE sp +1 bp CACATGT 6 bp CGGAAATTCCC
vn
7 915 bp D. mel. NEE sp +2 bp CACATGT 7 bp CGGAAATTCCC
vn
8 918 bp D. mel. NEE sp +5 bp CACATGT 10 bp CGGAAATTCCC
vn
9 947 bp D. mel. NEE wt ACACATGT 10 bp GGGAAACCCCA
vnd
CACATGTTG GGGAAA~ACCG~G
20 bp
10 300 bp D. mel. NEE wt trunc ACACATGT 10 bp GGGAAACCCCA
vnd
CACATGTTG ˜ GGGAAA~ACCG~G
11 266 bp D. mel. NEE wt trunc 20 bp
vnd
12 657 bp D. mel. NEE wt CACACATGTGTGTTTG 15 bp GGGAAAGCCCC
brk
CAACACATGTT GGGAA~TGTC~AA
21 bp
13 651 bp D. mel. NEE sp -3 bp CACACATGTGTGTTTG 12 bp GGGAAAGCCCC
brk
CAACACATGTT GGGAA~TGTC~AA
21 bp
14 553 bp D. mel. NEE wt CCACATGTGT 7 bp CGGAAATTCCC
sog
15 738 bp D. ana. NEE wt CCACATGTGT 3 bp AGGAAATTCCC
rho
16 758 bp D. ana. NEE wt CACATGT 5 bp CGGAAATTCCC
vn
17 642 bp D. ana. NEE wt CACACATGTT 11 bp GGGAAACCCCC
vnd
CACATGTGTTGG TGGAAA~AACC~G
40 bp
18 946 bp D. ana. NEE wt CACACATGTGT GGTTTGT 15 bp TGGAAAGCCCC
brk 5
19 658 bp D. ana. NEE wt CACATGTTGCTG 3 bp GG~AAAATTCC~A
Dl
20 843 bp D. pse. NEE wt CACATGTT 6 bp GGGAAATTCCT
rho
CCCACATGTGTTT 19 bp GGGAAATTCCT
CCCACATGTGTTT
45 bp CGGAAATTCCT
21 858 bp D. pse. NEE wt CCACATGTTTGG 5 bp CGGAAATTCCC
vn
22 1,305 bp D. pse. NEE wt CACACATGTTGG 11 bp GGGAAACTCCA
vnd
T
ACACATGTTTTT 10 bp GGGAA TCCCT
CACACATGTTGG ~TGGAAA~AACC~G
28 bp
23 859 bp D. pse. NEE wt CACACCACATGTGTGTTTG 15 bp GGGAAAGCCCC
brk
24 784 bp D. wil. NEE wt CACATGT 6 bp GGGAA~TTCC~TA
rho
CACACACATGTG 19 bp GGGAA~TTCC~TA
CACACACATGTG 26 bp CGGAAATTCCT
25 796 bp D. wil. NEE wt ACAAACACATGT 14 bp CGGAAATTCCC
vn
26 790 bp D. wil. NEE sp -7 bp CAAAACACATGT 7 bp CGGAAATTCCC
vn
27 964 bp D. wil. NEE wt CACACATGTTG 11 bp GGGAAACCCCA
vnd
28 960 bp D. wil. NEE sp +E(CA )T CACATGT 7 bp CGGAAA~AACC~G
vnd
CACACATGTTG 11 bp GGGAAACCCCA
29 748 bp D. wil. NEE wt CAACACATGTGTTTGGGTG 13 bp GGGAAAGCCCC
brk
30 742 bp D. wil. NEE sp -6 bp CAACACATGTGTTT 7 bp GGGAAAGCCCC
brk
31 726 bp D. vir. NEE wt CCACATGTG 7 bp CGGAAATTCCT
rho
32 828 bp D. vir. NEE wt CCACATGTTTGTG 6 bp CGGAAATTCCC
vn
33 1,011 bp D. vir. NEE wt CACACATGTTG 8 bp GGGAAACCCCA
vnd
34 756 bp D. vir. NEE wt CACATGTGTTTGG 12 bp GGGAAAGCCCC
brk
1. CA-satellite extending from intact E(CA)T elements is shown when present. Fragmented CA-satellite and their loosely
coordinated Dorsal spectra are not shown. Likely deprecated encodings are italicized.
2. Dorsal sites are written with the best halfsite on the top strand. Dβ sequences departing from species’ consensi are
indicated with a tilde.

Evolutionary origin of clustered enhancers 33
Table 3. CA-satellite content in Drosophila genomes and their canonical NEE sets.
D. melanogaster D. willistoni D. virilis
release 5.22 release 1.3 release 1.2
Total DNA in assembly 162,370,174 bp 223,610,028 bp 189,205,863 bp
% CA-satellite - genome 3.9% 4.0% 4.5%
% CA-satellite - canonical NEEs 5.3% 7.7% 10.0%
CA T
% E( ) - canonical NEEs 1.3% 1.5% 1.8%
CA-satellite was defined as CA-dinucleotide repeats of 2 or more with an optional single nucleotide extension
of the repeat pattern at either end. Canonical NEE sequences for vnd, rho, vn, brk loci were extracted
±480 bp from Dβ.