Multi-Objective Cooperative Search of Spatially Diverse Routes in Uncertain
Environments
Johnathan Votion and Yongcan Cao
Abstract—This paper focuses on developing new naviga- algorithms, such as A search, heuristic methods, Dijksta’s
tion and reconnaissance capabilities for cooperative unmanned algorithms, and Voronoi Diagram [11], are used to create
systems in uncertain environments. The goal is to design a
paths with minimum costs.
cooperative multi-vehicle system that can survey an unknown
Although the existing research provides numerous meth-
environment and find the most valuable route for personnel to
7102 raM 51  ]YS.sc[  1v18840.3071:viXra ods to derive paths for robotic systems, there has been very
travel. To accomplish the goal, the multi-vehicle system first
explores spatially diverse routes and then selects the safest limited work considering the selection of diverse enough
route. In particular, the proposed cooperative path planner routes such that rich knowledge can be obtained to find the
sequentially generates a set of spatially diverse routes according
safest path. Current methods cannot be easily adjusted to
to a number of factors, including travel distance, ease of
select how diverse the paths should be under different scenar-
travel, and uncertainty associated with the ease of travel. The
ios. For example, in disaster response missions, unmanned
planner’s dependence on each of these factors is altered by a
weighted score, doing so changes the criteria for determining vehicles that are used to search for the safest path should
an optimum route. To penalize the selection of same paths by coordinate their path planning efforts to ensure that minimum
different vehicles, a control gain is used to increase the cost of
overlap occurs when exploring the environment. When the
paths that lie near the route(s) assigned to other vehicles. By
environment is unknown, it becomes very challenging to plan
varying the control gain, the spatial diversity among routes can
paths for multiple vehicles cooperatively to satisfy both path
be accomplished. By repeatedly searching for different paths
cooperatively, an optimal path can be selected that yields the optimization and path diversity simultaneously. Considering
most valuable route. the different optimization criteria, such as travel distance,
Index Terms—Uncertain Environment; Cooperative Path
ease of travel, and uncertainty associated with the ease of
Planning; Multi-Objective Planning
travel, becomes a complex problem in determining the safest
route.
I. INTRODUCTION
The objective of the paper is to derive a uniform path
The recent capabilities of unmanned vehicles and robotic
planning algorithm that can address numerous criteria that
systems have increased their usefulness in military and
are of interest to the system operator for different missions.
rescue applications. For example, small UAVs are now being
To accomplish the objective, the robotic system need to
utilized to provide aerial surveillance in combat areas. This
explore spatially diverse paths for the subsequent selection of
work introduces a cooperative path planning method that
the safest route. The proposed cooperative path planner seeks
allows a team of autonomous vehicles to be instructed to
to generate a set of spatially diverse routes sequentially based
conduct reconnaissance throughout an environment in order
on numerous factors of interest, such as travel distance, ease
to determine a safe, low-risk route to a target location.
of travel, and uncertainty associated with the ease of travel.
Most unmanned vehicle systems experience degraded perfor-
The proposed path planner allows the users to create unique
mance when executing these cooperative missions due to the
sets of planned paths by changing parameters appropriately.
approximation of map information and inadequete scoring
To enable the selection of diverse paths by different vehicles,
algorithms used by the path planner.
a control gain is used to increase the cost of paths that lie near
In many applications, robotic systems need to take respon-
the route(s) assigned to other vehicles. By varying the control
sive actions in unknown/dynamic environments where both
gain, the spatial diversity among routes can be accomplished.
situational awareness and path planning need to be properly
For an unknown environment, repeatedly searching spatially
addressed. For example, the research work in [1], [2] focused
diverse paths can yield the most valuable route.
on properly assigning mobile sensors’ motion in order to
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In
maximize the detection probability with a given distribution
section II, the problem formulation is described. In section III
density function that indicates the probability that some
preliminary definitions are given. In section IV, the proposed
event takes place in a region. The existing work in [3]–[8]
method is described. In section V, simulations are made to
focuses on planning paths of robotic systems in uncertain
observe the performance of the proposed method. Finally, in
and dynamic environments. For example, one main research
section VI, the conclusion for this work is presented.
topic is to find the shortest path from a starting position
to a target location [9], [10], [14]–[20], where numerous II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
Acting as the first wave of on-site responders, a team
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engi-
of autonomous unmanned vehicles are instructed to find a
neering, The University of Texas, San Antonio, TX 78249.
Corresponding Author: Yongcan Cao (yongcan.cao@utsa.edu) “good quality” route so that human personnel can safely

travel through an environment. The quality of the route planner’s dependencies on traversability, travel distance, and
is determined by its traversability (i.e. ease of travel) and uncertainty of the path.
total length. The team of vehicles are tasked to explore the
environment and identify (from multiple possible routes) a III. PRELIMINARIES
safe path to a target location.
Let A (cid:44) {A ,··· ,A } represent a set of N ∈ Z
The routes assigned to the team are calculated in iterations, 1 N A A >0
vehicles in an unmanned system. Each vehicle is represented
with each route calculated to take a substantially different
as a particle in a 2-space environment with respect to the x
path through the map than any path defined in a previous
and y dimensions. Any position in the environment may be
iteration. The level of similarity between calculated paths is
described by
selected via a control gain, where high gain values result in
r = [r r ]T (1)
increased ‘dissimilarity’ between routes. Searching dissimilar x y
routes throughout the map is important because it allows the
where r ∈ R2 is the position vector.
unmanned system to obtain more map information then the
coverage provided by a single path. It also improves the
A. Defining the Roadmap
vehicle’s reaction to unforseen hazards. For example, the
initial path assigned to a vehicle may be obstructed such As presented in [21], a Voronoi diagram approach is used
that the vehicle is required to reroute its path. In this case the to define the roadmap. In the 2D case, an ordinary Voronoi
vehicle may use updated map information obtained through diagram is a partitioning of a plane into regions based on the
inter-vehicle communication to generate improved plans. euclidean distance to points in a specific subset of the plane.
Figure 1 illustrates how a team of unmanned vehicles can The Voronoi diagram is described by a number of points
perform a cooperative mission where a safe route to a target called generators, and their corresponding Voronoi cells. A
location is identified by exploring dissimilar routes (shown Voronoi diagram is defined such that any point within a
as the red trajectories). Initial paths for the vehicles are Voronoi cell is closer to that cell’s corresponding generator
generated using a priori data (e.g. satellite or high altitude than it is to any other generator. Figure 2 shows a Voronoi
imagery). Vehicles start from the blue marker, which in this diagram for some arbitrary placement of generators, where
example is an offshore location, and make their way along R is a list of vertex positions. The original work associated
V
assigned paths to the target location (denoted with the black with the Voronoi diagram can be found in [11] and [12]. A
marker). The unmanned vehicles are assumed to be either similar approach for defining generators is used in [13].
aerial or amphibious. Along the route, vehicles survey the
environment and update their maps accordingly. After reach-
ing the target location, the unmanned vehicles communicate
their data to an operator that can direct personnel along the
safest calculated path (shown as the black trajectory).
Fig. 2: Voronoi cell decomposition example
The Voronoi diagram is converted into roadmap informa-
tion by treating cell edges as possible paths and vertices
as waypoints. The roadmap is modified by removing su-
Fig. 1: Satellite image for mission area perfluous edges and inserting start and end points. Figure
3 illustrates this process, showing (in blue) the shortest
Because the terrain is unknown, the environment poses a path from the inserted start and end points. The roadmap
number of hazards to the unmanned systems. In addition the information is defined by the undirected adjacency matrix
a priori information initially used may not be consistent with G ∈ R(N W×N W) and cost matrix C ∈ R(N W×N W), where
changes that have recently occurred. For example, the tide N is the total number of waypoints. The elements of the
W
may change the position of the shoreline, vegetation may adjacency matrix are defined as G = 0, G = 1 if
nn nm,n(cid:54)=m
have grown abundant in concentrated areas, or fallen trees and only if there exists an edge between the vertex positions
may obstruct paths that were expected to be clear. listed in the nthand mth row of R , and G = 0
V nm,n(cid:54)=m
The operator may be confronted with a particular situation otherwise. A cost value is calculated for each edge defined in
in which he or she must prioritize path conditions (e.g. G and recorded into the corresponding position of C. Using
distance of the path vs. ease of travel of the path). To G and C the path planner (e.g. A*) can generate a “good
evaluate routes given prioritized conditions, the path planner quality” path (this work uses the shortest path algorithm
uses weighted gains. These weighted gains balance the given in [20]).

(2) and (3), respectively.
N
1 (cid:88)s
µ = s (2)
i
N
s
i=1
N
1 (cid:88)s
σ2 = (s − µ)2 (3)
i
N
s
i=1
Generally, costmaps only utilize the mean value by assign-
ing it as the grid cell’s costmap value. This work proposes
Fig. 3: Modified Voronoi diagram and calculated route be-
using a two-value costmap by also assigning a variance to
tween start/end points
each grid cell. This additional information is used to give a
measure of uncertainty to routes calculated by the path plan-
ner. Doing so allows operators to distinguish routes that have
been guaranteed to be safe versus routes that were calculated
B. Defining a Costmap to be safe but have a high level of uncertainty. This approach
is motivated by the work in [5], which uses gaussian process
techniques to generate probabilistic costmaps representing
Costmaps are typically used to represent a discrete variable disributions over possible terrain costs.
distribution (e.g. traversability) over an area. Costmaps are In this work the costmap is divided into an N × N
c c
generated by dividing the environment into grid cells and cell grid, where N represents the number of cells along
c
assigning a single value to each cell. Having one value each dimension of the costmap. Each cell is further divided
represent each position within that cell is an approximation into N subcells. Let X(N c×N c) ⊂ R2 represent the set of
s
and compromises path calculations, especially when the grid subcell information. The subcell information in the nth row
cell represents a relatively large area. If the grid cell repre- and mth column of X is represented as Xm ∈ R(N s×1).
n
sents a relatively large area in comparison to the unmanned Let the mean and variance information associated with the
vehicle (or traveling personnel), then the cell’s value used to subcell information X be represented as M ∈ R(N c×N c)
represent the vehicle’s exposure to the environment varies and V ∈ R(N c×N c), respectively. Each element M ∈ M
n,m
from the actual exposure according to how the costmap and V ∈ V reflects the mean and variance values of the
n,m
variable changes throughout the area of that cell (which subcell information in Xm.
n
for relatively large areas, can change quite drastically). This
means that even if the path planner has perfect costmap IV. METHOD
information, each grid cell will carry some variance in error
This work proposes a process for obtaining costmap
with respect to the cell’s assigned value.
data and developing the path planning algorithms that use
roadmap cost information. This process is described with the
flow chart shown in Figure 5. The proceeding subsections
describe our approach in detail.
Fig. 4: Costmap grid cell
Figure 4 illustrates how different positions within a grid
cell can experience a variation of the costmap variable even
if the true value (denoted as µ) assigned to the cell is known.
Figure 4 shows a costmap and an individual grid cell. The
grid cell is further divided into N subcells ({s ,··· ,s })
s 1 9
that can each be associated with a unique value representing
the distributed costmap variable. For simplification this ex-
ample uses N = 9, but can be extended to any number of
s
Fig. 5: Path planning flowchart
subcells. Given that the values of the subcells are known a
mean value µ and variance σ2 are calculated with equations

A. Updating Costmap Information previous estimates. The obtained measurement of a subcell is
denoted as s+ and the previous estimate (the a priori value)
Vehicles that explore unknown areas of the environment
k
s−
of that subcell is denoted as . It is assumed there is no
update local map information. As the vehicle traverses the
k
noise in obtaining subcell measurements.
grid cell, it collects an amount of information about the
cell area. The amount of information collected is determined Using this update scheme, the estimated cell mean will
by the vehicle’s sensor coverage and trajectory through the converge to the true value (µˆ → µ) as the number of unique
grid cell. If the grid cell represents a relatively large area subcells surveyed reaches N s. In addition, if the true value
in comparison to the unmanned vehicle only a portion of of the cell mean has already been obtained, the estimated
the grid cell can be surveyed at any one time. For instance, cell variance will converge to the true value (σˆ2 → σ2) as
Figure 6 shows a single grid cell, a vehicle, its trajectory the number of unique subcells surveyed reaches N s.
over the grid cell, and the vehicle’s limited sensor coverage
of the cell. An unmanned vehicle (ground vehicle or low B. Calculating Roadmap Scores
flying aerial vehicle) can only survey a fraction of the area
The path planner provides a path as a list of waypoints
defined by the grid cell.
using roadmap information matrices G and C. The calcu-
lation of the path relies heavily on how the cost matrix
C is defined. This work calculates cost matrix values as
a combination of both roadmap and costmap information.
The costmap information may be treated as a distribution
of terrain traversability, in which case the path planner is
designed to: i) reduce the length of the path, ii) reduce the
Fig. 6: Vehicle coverage in cell
uncertainty of the path, and iii) increase the ease of travel
along the path.
The ratio of ‘coverage’ area to grid cell area depends on
Each edge defined in G is scored according to its trajectory
the dimensions of the grid cell and limitations of the vehicle’s
through the environment. The edge’s score is recorded in
sensor. To approximate this relationship we have devised
C. The score is calculated to be proportional to the total
some simplifications. Assume that the ratio of coverage to
length of the edge, and reflects the traversability experienced
cell area is 1 : N and that the grid cells are divided into
s along the edge. Instead of integrating the length of the edge
subcells according to this coverage ratio. Figure 7 shows
with respect to these variables, an approximation is used that
a divided cell given N = 9. The vehicle is assumed to
s averages the traversability and its grid cell variance using
only provide coverage information for the subcell in which it
three points along each edge. Specifically, the points along
has resided. With this simplification, a trajectory through the
the edge that are 1/6, 1/2, and 5/6 of the edge length. Figure 8
grid cell shown in Figure 7 results in obtained measurement
illustrates where these points are along some arbitrary edge.
readings for the set of subcells {s ,s ,s ,s }.
2 3 4 5
Fig. 7: Approximation of grid cell coverage
As correct information for any subcell s is obtained the
i
previous estimate of the subcell sˆ is overwritten and the
i
mean and variance information of the grid cell is updated.
Fig. 8: Approximation of roadmap edge
The mean and variance are updated with the following
equations
(s+ − s−) Figure 8-A shows a trajectory through two grid cells,
(µ)+ = (µ)− + k k (4) with the red line denoting the edge of interest. This edge is
N
s
inspected closer in Figure 8-B, where three points are iden-
(s+ − µ+)2 − (s− − µ−)2
(σ2)+ = (σ2)− + k k (5) tified. With respect to Figure 8 these points are associated
N
s with the µ values µ = µ , µ = µ , and µ = µ .
1/6 1 1/2 2 5/6 2
where (µ)+ and (σ2)+ are the updated estimates of the The values for σ2 are assigned similarly. Using these points
mean and variance, respectively, and (µ)− and (σ2)− are the average values of µ and σ2 used to calculate the edge score

are defined as taken to calculate the roadmap scores. Let (x ,y ) be the
i i
1 location of the midpoint for the edge e , then we define the
i
µ = (µ + µ + µ ) (6)
avg 1/6 1/2 5/6 penalty f (x,y) from this edge to a point (x,y) as
3 i
1
σ2 = (σ2 + σ2 + σ2 ) (7)
avg 3 1/6 1/2 5/6 (cid:112)
d = (x − x )2 + (y − y )2 (9)
i i i
where the fraction in the subscript represents its correspond-
γ d2
(− i )
ing point along the edge. The edge score c is then defined f i(x,y) = e 2σ¯i (10)
(cid:112)
2πσ¯2
as i
The total accumulated penalty due to each edge in the defined
c = d(k + k µ + k σ2 ) (8) route is given as an update of the edge cost.
1 2 avg 3 avg
where d is the total length of the edge and k ,k , and k are N e
1 2 3 (cid:88)
c+ = c− + f (x,y) (11)
weighted gains. i
i=1
C. Selecting Dissimilar Routes
where c+ is the new edge cost after being penalized, and c−
In order for the unmanned system to obtain adequate was the previous value. The constant N denotes the number
e
knowledge, the path planner must provide a number of of edges in the defined route. The variables γ and σ¯2 are the
routes that explore unique areas of the map. Each time local control gain and control variance, respectively, that vary the
costmap information is updated the path planner re-calculates rate at which the edge is penalized due to its distance from
the set of routes using the new vehicle locations as the start previously used edges. Observe that if γ = 0 no penalty
points. occurs and the alternative routes will be calculated to be
The path planner calculates a set of routes in iterations. equal to the previously defined routes.
In each iteration the planner penalizes the roadmap cost
V. SIMULATION
matrix C and calculates a single route. In the first iteration
a route is calculated using the original roadmap information In this section, three experiments are described that pro-
G and C (i.e. no penalty). In each other iteration, the cost vide results regarding the path planning method proposed in
matrix C is penalized before calculating the route. The cost this work. While numerous tests may be designed to analyze
matrix is penalized by increasing edge scores based on the different aspects of the method (i.e. computational complex-
edge’s distance from already defined routes. If the edges are ity, stability of the solution, scalability), the experiments
close to any route previously defined then they are heavily presented here are designed to illustrate the fundamental
penalized, if the edges are far from any route previously characteristics of the system. The simulations provide results
defined then they are lightly penalized. Penalizing the cost with respect to the multi-vehicle system’s capability to: i)
matrix C in such a manner encourages the planner to find use weighted gains to define optimal path conditions, ii)
a set of dissimilar routes through the environment. Figure calculate spatially distributed routes with control gain (and
9 illustrates how an individual edge is penalized due to its control variance), and iii) calculate the most valuable route
distance from a defined route. after exploring the environment. Many of the constraints
that may be complex are simplified such that: the time for
agents to process information is assumed instantaneous, the
dynamic model of the agent is chosen to be linear, the
costmap information is 2D and constant, and the system’s
inter-vehicle communication is guaranteed.
Costmap Information: In every simulation the costmap
information is represented by a 20 × 20 cell grid. Each nth
row and mth column cell is associated with the set of data
Xm ∈ R(9×1). The values for each element of Xm are
n n
chosen as a random variable from a gaussian distribution
with mean and variance values equal to the values of the
associated elements in M and V respectively. Each element
in M is calculated as a random variable from a uniform
distribution in the range (2,8) and V is calculated from
Fig. 9: Edge penalized due to defined route
a gaussian distribution with zero mean and variance 1. In
addition, each simulation utilizes the parameters listed in
Let e be any edge in a defined route. Every edge of the Table I.
i
cost matrix C is penalized by a measure of distance between
A. Experiment 1
itself and each edge e in the defined route (see Figure 9).
i
The distance is taken with respect to the midpoints of each In this experiment a single vehicle plans three paths from
edge. Recall that this point coincides with the measurements a starting point to a target location with perfect costmap

TABLE I: Parameters for each simulation
generated by feeding penalized roadmap score information
to the planner. The score information is penalized according
parameter value
starting position [200,1800] to the vehicle sequence as follows: i) vehicle A does not
1
target position [1700,600] penalize score information, ii) vehicle A penalizes score
2
range of x-axis (0:2000)m
information with respect to the route assigned to A , and
1
range of y-axis (0:2000)m
iii) vehicle A penalizes the score information with respect
3
to the route assigned to A and A . The spatial distribution
1 2
(SD) of the paths over the environment is determined by
information. The trajectory of the paths through the environ-
the control gain and control variance. The control gain and
ment is determined by the weighted gains used to score the
control variance are used to penalize the roadmap scores
roadmap information. Each path will be generated using a
according to the paths assigned to the system (see equation
unique set of weighted gains. Depending on the values of
(10)). Figure 11 and 12 shows the paths generated for A
the weighted gains the planner can prioritize the trajectory 1
(red path), A (blue path), and A (green path) by using
with respect to distance, terrain traversability, or variation of 2 3
the control gains and weighted gains as defined in Table
the traversed areas (see equation (8)). Figure 10 shows the
II. Figure 11 represents the ‘Low SD’ path, where routes
paths generated by using the weighted gains as defined in
Table II with control gains set to γ = 10 and σ¯2 = 0.001. are generated with close proximity to each other. Figure 12
represents the ‘High SD’ path, where routes are generated
TABLE II: Exp. 1 Parameteters with far proximity from each other.
Path k k k
1 2 3 TABLE III: Exp. 2 Parameteters
Red 30 10 10
Blue 0 30 0 Paths γ σ¯2 [k k k ]
1 2 3
Green 0 2 5
Low SD 100 0.0003 [0.6 0.3 0.1]
High SD 500 0.00003 [0.6 0.3 0.1]
Variation of Weighted Gains
2000
Spatially Distributed Paths
2000
1800
1800
1600
1600
1400
1400
1200
1200
1000
1000
800
800
600
600
400
400
200
200
0
0 500 1000 1500 2000
0
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
Fig. 10: Planned paths using different weighted gains
Fig. 11: Planned paths with low spatial distribution
The path in Figure 10 outlined in red represents a path that
is planned solely on the distance of the route. The path in
C. Experiment 3
Figure 10 outlined in blue represents a path that is planned
In this experiment vehicles A , A , and A cooperatively
heavily on the traversability of the route’s terrain (although 1 2 3
plan three spatially distributed paths from a starting point
the score is still correlated to the distance). The path Figure
to a target location using estimated costmap information.
10 outlined in green represents the lowest terrain variation,
As vehicles explore the environment they update the esti-
meaning that the terrain experienced by traversing the route
mated costmap information (see equations (4) and (5)). After
has a higher consistency with the costmap information used
reaching the target location, the updated costmap information
to generate the route.
is used to calculate the most valuable route from starting
B. Experiment 2
point to the target location. Figure 13 shows the trajectories
In this experiment vehicles A , A , and A cooperatively of agent A in red, A in blue, and A in green. Figure
1 2 3 1 2 3
plan three spatially distributed paths from a starting point to 14 compares the trajectories between three optimal routes.
a target location with perfect costmap information. Vehicles Two of the routes are calculated using the a priori and
plan their paths in sequence, such that each assigned route is updated estimate of the costmap information. The third route

| parameter        |
|:-----------------|
| startingposition |
| targetposition   |
| rangeofx-axis    |
| rangeofy-axis    |

|   k2 |   k3 |
|-----:|-----:|
|   10 |   10 |
|   30 |    0 |
|    2 |    5 |

| Paths   | γ σ¯2       |
|:--------|:------------|
| LowSD   | 100 0.0003  |
| HighSD  | 500 0.00003 |

| 0   | 1   | 2   | 3   | 4   |
|:----|:----|:----|:----|:----|
|     |     |     |     |     |

| 0   | 1   | 2   |
|:----|:----|:----|
|     |     |     |

Spatially Distributed Paths True vs. Estimated Optimal Routes
2000 2000
1800 1800
1600 1600
1400 1400
1200 1200
1000 1000
800 800
600 600
400 400
200 200
0 0
0 500 1000 1500 2000
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
Fig. 12: Planned paths with high spatial distribution Fig. 14: True vs estimated optimum paths
is calculated using the true costmap information. The control
prioritizing the costmap value (in this case traversability).
gains and weighted gains used for providing these results are
defined in Table IV.
VI. CONCLUSION
TABLE IV: Exp. 3 Parameteters
Planning a good quality path in dynamic environments
γ σ¯2 [k k k ]
1 2 3
requires exact map information and a solid definition of
10 0.0001 [0 1 0]
what the optimal route conditions are. The path planning
method proposed assumes that estimated a priori map in-
formation is available and updated through exploration of
Travelled Paths
2000 the environment. The path planning method uses weights to
prioritize the optimal route conditions, and a map update
1800
scheme to address sensor coverage limitations. To increase
1600
coverage the planner generates spatially diverse routes for
1400
the vehicle to travel. The spatial distribution of the paths
1200 is varied using control gains in a penalization process. The
sretem
planner penalizes roadmap information used to generate the
1000
vehicle’s path based on routes assigned to other vehicles.
800
After traversing their routes, from a starting point to a target
600
location, the system calculates a candidate route to be the
400 best quality route according to the defined optimal conditions
200 and updated map information.
To emphasize the utilization of the proposed method
0
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000
meters simulations are provided that observe how varying different
parameters effects the performance. Simulations are con-
Fig. 13: Paths travelled by agents
ducted to test the ability of the path planner by: i) varying
the weighted gains, ii) varying the control gains, and iii)
As seen in Figures 13 the paths assigned to the vehicles comparing the system’s best estimated route with the true
change throughout the mission. The vehicles continuously optimal route. Results show that the performance of the
update data and plan new paths. Figure 14 shows three proposed method relies heavily on how the true and esti-
routes. The solid red route is the true optimal route. The mated costmap information is defined. Due to the vehicle’s
blue dashed route is the route calculated using the a priori partial coverage of the costmap cells, the update scheme
information. The green dashed route is the route calculated does not allow the estimated costmap values to converge
using the updated estimated information. Observe that the to their true values. This can cause the candidate route to
updated estimated information enables the planner to provide be incorrectly identified. Further investigation is needed to
a more optimal route then what would have been provided identify the relationship between parameter values and how
by only using the a priori data. Also, notice from the the correlation between different costmap information can
value of the weighted gains that the routes are evaluated by effect path planning performance.

| 0   | 1   |
|:----|:----|
|     |     |

REFERENCES
[1] J. Cortes, et. al., “Coverage control for mobile sensing networks,”
IEEE Trans. on Robotics and Auto., vol.20, no.2, pp.243-255, April
2004.
[2] Y. Wang and I.I. Hussein, “Awareness Coverage Control Over Large-
Scale Domains with Intermittent Communication,” IEEE Transactions
on Auto. Control, vol.55, no.8, pp.1850-1859, Aug. 2010.
[3] L. Jaillet, J. Corte´s, and T. Sime´on, “Sampling-Based Path Planning
on Configuration-Space Costmaps,” IEEE Trans. on Robotics,vol.26,
no.4, 2010.
[4] L. Murphy and P. Newman, “Risky Planning: Path Planning over
CostmapswithaProbabilisticallyBoundedSpeed-AccuracyTradeoff,”
in the 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automa-
tion, Shanghai, China, 2011.
[5] L. Murphy and P. Newman, “Risky Planning on Probabilistic
Costmaps for Path Planning in Outdoor Environments,” IEEE
Trans. on Robotics, vol.29, no.2, 2013.
[6] A. Wallar, E. Plaku, and D.A. Sofage, ”Reactive Motion Planning
for Unmanned Aerial Surveillance of Risk Sensitive Areas,” IEEE
Trans. Auto. Science and Eng.,vol.12, no.3, pp.969-980, July 2015.
[7] K.M. Krishna, et. al., “Parametric Control of Multiple Unmanned
Air Vehicles over an Unknown Hostile Territory,” inInter. Conf. on
Integration of Knowledge intensive Multi-Agent Syst., pp.117-121,
Waltham, Massachusetts, 2005.
[8] J.S. Bellingham, et. al., “Cooperative Path Planning for Multiple UAVs
in Dynamic and Uncertain Environments,” in the 41st IEEE Conf. on
Decision and Control, vol.3, pp.2816-2822, Dec. 2002.
[9] L. Fu, D. Sun, and L.R. Rilett, “Heuristic shortest path algorithms
for transportation applications: State of the art,” in Computers and
Operation Research, vol.33, no.11, pp.3324-3343, Nov. 2006.
[10] P. Bhattacharya and M.L. Gavrilova, “Roadmap-Based Path Planning
- Using the Voronoi Diagram for a Clearance-Based Shortest Path,”
IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol.15, no.2, pp.58-66, 2008.
[11] G. Voronoi, “Nouvelles applications des parame`tres continus a` la
the´orie des formes quadratiques. Premier Me´moire: Sure quelques
proprietee´s des formes quadratiques positives parfaites,” in the J. reine
angew. Math., vol.133, pp.97-178, 1907.
[12] G. Voronoi, “Nouvelles applications des parame`tres continus a` la
the´orie des formes quadratiques. Deuxie`me Me´moire: Recherches sur
les paralle´lloe`dres primitifs,” in the J. reine angew. Math., vol.133,
pp.167-171, 1908.
[13] K. Sugihara, “Approximation of generalized Voronoi diagrams by
ordinary Voronoi diagrams,” CVGIP, Graph. Models Image Process.,
vol.55, no.6, pp.522-531, 1992.
[14] T.A. J. Nicholson, “Finding the shortest route between two points in
a network,” The Computer Journal, vol.9, no.3, pp.275-280, 1966.
[15] P.E. Hart, N.J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael, “A formal basis for the
heuristic determination of minimum cost paths,” IEEE Trans. Systems
Science and Cybernetics, vol.4, no.2, pp.100-107, 1968.
[16] A.V. Goldberg and C. Harrelson, “Computing the shortest path: A
search meets graph theory,” SODA ’05 Proceedings of the 16th annual
ACM-SIAM symp. on Discrete algorithms, pp.156-165, Philadelphia,
2005.
[17] A. Stentz, “Optimal and Efficient Path Planning for Partially-Known
Environments,” Proceedings of the Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automa-
tion, pp.3310-3317, 1994.
[18] A.V. Goldberg and C. Harrelson, “Computing the shortest path:
A search meets graph theory,” Technical Report MSR-TR-2004-24,
Microsoft Research, Vancouver, Canada, 2004.
[19] H.O. Arranz, D.R. Llanos, A.G. Escribano, “The shortest-path prob-
lem: analysis and comparison of methods,” in Synthesis Lectures on
Theoretical Computer Science, San Rafael, California, 2015.
[20] J. Kirk, (2008, May 22), Dijksta’s Minimum Cost Path Algorithm
(1st edition) [Online file: MATLAB 8.4 (R2014b)]. Available:
http://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/20025-
dijkstra-s-minimum-cost-path-algorithm
[21] J. Votion, “Estimating the Operational Status of Agent in Distributed
Multi-Agent Systems Experiencing Uncertain Communication and
Agent Attrition,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Dept. Elect. Comp. Eng., Uni-
versity of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, 2016.