 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Twelve Month Report 2020
 
JRP14-AMR2.1-FULLFORCE
 
 
 
    
Responsible  Partner:  Pieter-Jan 
Ceyssens 
Contributing  partners:  Muna  Anjum,  Henrik 
Hasman,  Saria  Otani,  Benoit  Doublet,  Stefan 
Widgren 
   

                         
   
 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
 
European  Joint  Programme  full  Promoting One Health in Europe through joint actions on foodborne zoonoses, 
title  antimicrobial resistance and emerging microbiological hazards  
European  Joint  Programme  One Health EJP 
acronym 
Funding  This project has received funding from the European  Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830.  
Grant Agreement  Grant agreement n° 773830 
Start Date  01/01/2018 
Duration  60 Months 
 
DOCUMENT MANAGEMENT 
 
Project deliverable  12 Month Report Y3 (2020) 
Project Acronym  JRP14-AMR2.1-FULLFORCE 
Author  Pieter-Jan CEYSSENS 
Other contributors   
Due  month  of  the  M37 
report 
Actual  submission  M36 
month 
Type   R 
R: Document, report 
Save date: 13-Jan-25 
DEC:  Websites,  patent 
filings,  videos,  etc.; 
OTHER 
Dissemination level  PU 
PU: Public (default) 
This is the default setting. If this project deliverable should be confidential, please 
CO:  confidential,  only 
add  justification  here  (may  be  assessed  by  PMT): 
for  members  of  the 
 ..................................................................................................................................... 
consortium  (including 
the  Commission   .....................................................................................................................................  
Services) 
Dissemination  OHEJP WP 1  ☐  OHEJP WP 2  ☐  OHEJP WP 3  ☐ 
Author’s suggestion to 
OHEJP WP 4  ☐  OHEJP WP 5  ☐  OHEJP WP 6  ☐ 
inform  the  following 
OHEJP WP 7  ☐  Project Management Team ☐ 
possible  interested 
Communication Team ☐  Scientific Steering Board ☐ 
parties. 
National Stakeholders/Program Owners Committee ☐ 
EFSA ☐     ECDC ☐     EEA ☐     EMA ☐     FAO ☐     WHO ☐     OIE  ☐ 
Other international stakeholder(s): ………………………………………………………… 
Social Media:  .................................................................................................................. 
Other recipient(s):  ...................................................................................................... 
 

| European Joint Programme full   | Promoting One Health in Europe through joint actions on foodborne zoonoses,   |
| title                           | antimicrobial resistance and emerging microbiological hazards                 |
|:--------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| European Joint Programme        | One Health EJP                                                                |
| acronym                         |                                                                               |
| Funding                         | This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020      |
|                                 | research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830.            |
| Grant Agreement                 | Grant agreement n° 773830                                                     |
| Start Date                      | 01/01/2018                                                                    |
| Duration                        | 60 Months                                                                     |

| Project deliverable    | 12 Month Report Y3 (2020)                                                                                                             |
|:-----------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Project Acronym        | JRP14-AMR2.1-FULLFORCE                                                                                                                |
| Author                 | Pieter-Jan CEYSSENS                                                                                                                   |
| Other contributors     |                                                                                                                                       |
| Due month of the       | M37                                                                                                                                   |
| report                 |                                                                                                                                       |
| Actual submission      | M36                                                                                                                                   |
| month                  |                                                                                                                                       |
| Type                   | R                                                                                                                                     |
| R: Document, report    | Save date: 13-Jan-25                                                                                                                  |
| DEC: Websites, patent  |                                                                                                                                       |
| filings, videos, etc.; |                                                                                                                                       |
| OTHER                  |                                                                                                                                       |
| Dissemination level    | PU                                                                                                                                    |
| PU: Public (default)   | This is the default setting. If this project deliverable should be confidential, please                                               |
| CO: confidential, only | add justification here (may be assessed by PMT):                                                                                      |
| for members of the     | ..................................................................................................................................... |
| consortium (including  | ..................................................................................................................................... |
| the Commission         |                                                                                                                                       |
| Services)              |                                                                                                                                       |
| Dissemination          | OHEJP WP 1 ☐ OHEJP WP 2 ☐ OHEJP WP 3 ☐                                                                                                |
| Author’s suggestion to | OHEJP WP 4 ☐ OHEJP WP 5 ☐ OHEJP WP 6 ☐                                                                                                |
| inform the following   | OHEJP WP 7 ☐ Project Management Team ☐                                                                                                |
| possible interested    | Communication Team ☐ Scientific Steering Board ☐                                                                                      |
| parties.               | National Stakeholders/Program Owners Committee ☐                                                                                      |
|                        | EFSA ☐ ECDC ☐ EEA ☐ EMA ☐ FAO ☐ WHO ☐ OIE ☐                                                                                           |
|                        | Other international stakeholder(s): …………………………………………………………                                                                            |
|                        | Social Media: ..................................................................................................................      |
|                        | Other recipient(s): ......................................................................................................            |

                         
 
 
TITLE 
 
1.  Summary of the work carried out  
500 words, 1 page. Please emphasize the main scientific results and outcomes. Pay special 
attention to the impact the project may have for the OHEJP and its stakeholders. This part 
will be published and should therefore be clear on its own. The CommsTeam may use this 
summary for communication means. 
The goal of the Full Force project is to supply 17 EU partners with a technological toolbox and hands-
on training in Single-Molecule Real-Time (SMRT) sequencing, and to apply this knowledge on six study 
cases and applications in metagenomics and AMR transmission models. Using this state-of-the-art 
technology, public health and veterinary labs will have the capacity to perform full-length sequencing, 
and gain detailed insight in mobile genetic elements (MGEs) which carry antimicrobial resistance and 
virulence genes within and across species.  
Unfortunately, this project set-up has been hit hard by the Covid-19 pandemic. The basis of this project 
was supposed to be an on-site, three day workshop on SMRT sequencing, held at the State Serum 
Institute (SSI, DK), followed by a proficiency test to analyse each partner’s capacity to perform SMRT 
sequencing. Due to restrictions imposed by all EU governments, we had to postpone and reoriented 
this workshop to an online course held from September 7-8. Moreover, all research activities were 
suspended  for  more  than  two  months  during  lockdown,  and  many  consortium  members  were 
reoriented  towards  Covid-19  surveillance.  Likewise, the  physical  kick-off  meeting,  planned  during 
ECCMID 2020 in Paris, was cancelled and replaced by a meeting in Brussels on October 8. It goes 
without saying that all this is causing significant delays in deliverables and milestones, as elaborated 
more in detail in the sections below. However, we are still confident that all goals of the Full Force 
project are still within reach.  
•  Applying intensive workload during the SMRT course, we still hope that our consortium partners 
with limited SMRT skills will be able to reach a sufficient technical level in plasmid sequencing. 
To maximize the output from this project, SSI scientists involved in WP1 are developing an easy-
to-use software package (tentatively named Full Force Plasmid Assembler – FuFoPA), which will 
automatically perform hybrid assemblies through the build-in UniCycler program from a 
combination of short and long sequence reads.  
•  A proficiency test, to assess each institute’s capacity for SMRT sequencing, has been organised 
by SSI, using reference material from BfR. Samples are sent out in November 2020, and results 
are expected by the end of February 2021. 
•  Although WP2 (five cases studies implementing long-read sequencing on existing datasets) has 
suffered some delays, substantial progress has been made. The focus will be hypothesis 
generation based on short-read sequence data for the five defined case studies (T2.1-2.5). 
Short-read Illumina data will allow comparison of both AMR profile and total plasmid content, as 
well as relatedness of isolates . Based on these results a subset of isolates will be choosen for 
MinION runs. 
•  WP5 has not been impacted by the pandemic, as no lab work is required. The design of a 
transmission spread model of pAMR in the simulation framework SimInf has been initiated by 
collaboration between consortium partners.  
 
 
3 
 

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
2.  Work carried out in the JRP/JIP, scientific results and integrative 
outcomes 
 
5000 words, 10 pages. Please provide enough detail to understand the work done per task, 
without additional information. All aspects should be discussed, scientific and others 
(integrative activities, etc.).  
 
WP 0: PROJECT MANAGEMENT (M25-M54) 
This overarching WP ensures proper coordination at both the overall project and the individual WPs, 
as well as timely reporting of results and budgets according to the formal EU requirements. 
 
Task 0.1: MEETINGS AND TELCALLS (M25-M54) 
The  two  major  consortium  meetings,  planned  during  ECCMID  (Paris)  and  the  SMRT  sequencing 
workshop  (SSI),  were  postponed  due  to  Covid-19 measures.  These were  replaced  by one-to-one 
teleconferences held by the PI with each individual partners, and by specific calls organized by task 
and  WP  leaders.  An  online 
workshop  on  SMRT  sequencing 
(See WP1) was held is planned on 
September  7-8,  and  the  online 
kick-off/progress  meeting  was 
organized  on  October  8  in 
Brussels.  
 
The meeting outline was as follows, giving an 
overview of all ongoing work packages: 
 
A full meeting report was published online at 
10.5281/zenodo.4275887 
 
Task 0.2: REPORTING (M25-M54) 
Five  deliverables  from  WP0  and  WP1  were 
uploaded to Zenodo. The nine month report 
was submitted in due time.  
 
Task 0.3: CENTRAL DATA REPOSITORY (M25-M36) 
FULL_FORCE will use a centralized data repository to upload sequence- and metadata which are 
generated during WP1 and WP2. Originally, we planned to use the AMR data hub of the European 
COMPARE Consortium and the European Nucleotide Archive (ENA). However, we were not successful 
in reaching an agreement with ENA, who is still negotiating single-subcontractor model for hubs 
created during COMPARE. Therefore, we have decided to use a commercial cloud tool (OwnCloud) for 
temporal data storage during Full Force.  
The platform was presented during the online workshop with a vitual tour of Owncloud, and an 
overview of the various groups and possibilities. This presentation was recorded, and shared online at 
10.5281/zenodo.4277545. 
25/11/2020    Page 
4 

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
 
Interestingly, other EJP projects (e.g., ADONIS, FARMED) were inspired by Full Force, and chose to use 
the same platform for data sharing. 
 
Task 0.4: DATA MANAGEMENT PLAN (M25-M54) 
In September 2020, a new Data Management 
Platform  based  on  the  CDP  software  was 
embraced by OHEJP. Full Force’s PI followed 
the  training  coordinated  by  the  EJP  WP4 
responsible, Géraldine Boseret. In September 
2020,  a  complete  DMP  of  Full  Force  was 
created  and  uploaded  to 
https://apps.lisam.com/app/#Apps/CDP. 
This plan will be updated annualy. As important part of the DMP, a framework agreement on Material 
Transfer was drafted, circulated and signed among all 18 participating institutions. This agreement 
covers all transfer of data and strains during Full Force.  
 
 
WP 1: SMRT IMPLEMENTATION (M25-M36) 
In  the  pre-pandemic  planning  of  Full  Force,  we  scheduled  three-day  workshop  on  practical 
implementation of long-read sequencing in Copenhagen. The main goals was to get less advanced 
users of SMRT sequencing up to speed, and to use the technological know-how in WP2-4. However, as 
explained below, we were forced to postpone this workshop and suffer from delays in deliverables and 
milestones.  
 
Task 1.1 METHODOLOGY FOR MGE SEQUENCING (M25-M27) 
In two rounds of teleconferences (January and March 2020) led by RIVM, task participants shared 
experiences in SMRT sequencing. In short, SSI results are between N50 of 15-20k, RIVM results N50 of 
35k. Regarding DNA extraction methodologies, there was a choice between faster (semi-)automated 
protocols using magnetic beads (as used by Sciensano, APHA and SSI), and more elaborate protocols 
based on DNA precipitation as used by RIVM. As N50 of the RIVM protocol is clearly higher, it was 
decided  to  go  for  the  longer  procedure  to  produce  highest-quality  data.  Both  protocols  can  be 
compared during the proficiency testing of Task 1.3.  
A final consensus protocol for SMRT sequencing was elaborated by RIVM, based on the rapid library 
generation protocol from Nanopore. It is published under embargo at 10.5281/zenodo.4277521 and 
contains the following parts: 
1. DNA isolation from strains cultured in liquid medium, using DNA/RNA shield and  QuickExtract 
Bacterial DNA Extraction Solution 
2.  A classical DNA precipitation step, using 3M sodium acetate pH 5.2 for ethanol precipitation 
3.    SMRT  run  set-up  using  the  Rapid  Barcoding  Sequencing  system,  using  the  manufacturers’ 
recommendations.  
This protocol (JRP-WP1.D3) was shared among all participating institutes alongside the instructions of 
the proficiency test (Task 1.2)  
 
25/11/2020    Page 
5 

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
 
 
 
Task 1.2 SMRT SEQUENCING WORKSHOP (M28-M30) 
The basis of this project was supposed to be an on-site, three day workshop on SMRT sequencing, held 
at the Statens Serum Institut (SSI, DK) in Q2 of 2020, followed by a proficiency test to analyse each 
partner’s capacity to perform SMRT sequencing. Due to restrictions imposed by all EU governments, 
we had to postpone and reorient this workshop to an online course to be held on September 7-9, 2020.  
 
In the months leading to the workshop, and in an effort lead by Søren Overballe-Petersen, Henrik 
Hasman (SSI) and involving multiple members of their team, the Full Force Plasmid Assembler (FFPA 
v1.0) was created. This python script joins best-in-field tools to trim and QC short en long sequence 
reads  (qcat,  Trimmometric),  enables  species  identification  through  Kraken  en  performs  either 
Nanopore    and  hybrid  assemblies  through  Unicycler.  Currently,  further  refinement  of  the  FFPA 
software is planned by WP1 members.  
The package can be locally installed by members of the Full Force consortium, but was installed on a 
Google cloud to enable training during the workshop.  The outline of this two-day event is shown above, 
and resulted in basic training of non-expert bioinformaticians for plasmid assembly.  
 
 
Task 1.3 PROFICIENCY TEST FOR MGE SEQUENCING (M31-M42) 
Each institution’s proficiency in SMRT sequencing will be assessed afterwards using a proficiency test, 
organised and coordinated by SSI. Given the delay in the workshop, this EQA is being organised in M37-
42. Upon discussion during and after the workshop, it was decided to include 5 Escherichia coli strains 
from BfR (GER) as reference strains, since they have been sequenced using Illumina, MinION and 
PacBIO technologies.  
 
25/11/2020    Page 
6 

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
In the PT instructions, it is highlighted that the 
Full  Force  SMRT  protocol  by  RIVM  (current 
version  2)  should  be  followed  to  produce  the 
ONT  sequencing  data,  so  all  data  can  be 
aggregated  into  one  common  method  paper. 
However,  as  many  partners  have  already 
established  in-house/homemade  sequencing 
protocol  (e.g.  for  DNA  purification  or  hybrid 
assembly),  the  option  to  benchmark  these 
against the Full Force results is also foreseen.  
 
The strains have been send out mid-November, 
and results are expected to be shared with SSI by 
March 2021.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure. Some post-sequencing QC parameters, which will be assessed during the EQA.  
 
WP 2: GENOME STUDIES (M25-M54) 
In WP2, the acquired SMRT toolbox will be applied in the (re-)sequencing of AMR strains from various 
research and surveillance projects in WP2 including EU projects such as EFFORT, COMPARE, ENGAGE 
and ARDIG, as well as national and EU surveillance activities for which short read sequences are 
available. Given the postponed SMRT workshop, focus in WP2 in the first months of Full Force was lead 
on hypothesis generation based on short-read sequence data for the five defined studies cases (T2.1-
2.5).  Short-read  Illumina  data  will  allow  comparison  of  total  plasmid  content  and  phylogenetic 
relatedness of isolates and based on those results choose a subset of isolates for MinION runs. 
 
Task 2.1 MGE evolution in longitudinal sample sets (ARDIG, ABRES) (M25-M54) 
During a teleconference coordinated by Muna Anjum (APHA, UK), task participants decided to focus 
on plasmid evolution in longitudinal datasets from livestock and human samples. It was agreed to focus 
on plasmid evolution within the IncI1 plasmids encoding bla , with main research question being: 
CTX-M-1
•  What is the European diversity in the complete sequences of these plasmids? 
•  Can specific factors be recognized in the most successful plasmids? 
•  How have these plasmids evolved over the past decade? 
All partners will examine short read sequence data from their databases to enable selection of isolates 
harbouring IncI1 plasmids encoding bla , for long-read sequencing.  Based on the available data, 
CTX-M-1
it will be decided if isolates before 2010, other ESBLs and non-ESBLs will be included in the final dataset.  
 
25/11/2020    Page 
7 

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
 
Task 2.2 MGE evolution in cross-sectional data sets (EFFORT, ENGAGE & National Surveillance) (M28-
M54) 
Jens-Andre Hammerl (Bfr, GER) coordinates the group studying cross-sectional datasets. In a series of 
teleconferences, it was decided to focus on  IncK plasmids (with/without CMY-2). The main issue was 
the preclassification as IncB/O/K/Z-positive by PlasmidFinder, while this task would focus only on IncK 
plasmids. Therefore, more discussion is needed on the identification of reliable detection markers for 
IncK classification, like RNAI or phylogeny. 
 
Task 2.3 Klebsiella pneumoniae: the canary in the coalmine (M28-M54) 
Alma Brolund (PHAS) organised teleconferences with task participants, in which it was decided to focus 
on K. pneumoniae isolates with reduced susceptibility to carbapemens. Participants from Norway, 
Denmark, Sweden, The Netherlands and Portugal agreed that isolates with proposed high variation in 
genetic context were seen as most interesting to study. A separate work group will be initiated where 
Klebsiella  isolates  from  the  animal  (and 
environmental?)  sector  can  be  further 
discussed.  A  first  analysis  of 
diversity/overlap  between  these  is 
performed  by  RIVM.  The  task  leader  sent 
around a metadata sheet serving as basis for 
isolate inclusion.  
 
Task 2.4 ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae 
in  horses  –  A  separated  epidemiology  of 
plasmids? (M28-M54) 
SVA  (Stefan  Borjesson)  coordinated  a 
teleconference  with  task  participants,  in 
which  it  was  decided  to  focus  on  E.  coli 
isolates from horses encoding bla and 
CTX-M-1 
bla  genes. All short-read sequencing has 
SHV-12
been performed, and data has been shared on OwnCloud.  
A first rough analysis has been performed by Aldert Zomer (Utrecht University), which will serve to 
select representative isolates of each cluster for long read sequencing (see figure on the left).  
It is also worth noting that task leader (Stefan Borjesson) has been replaced by Joost Hendrickx (RIVM, 
NL) due to changes in job positions.  
 
Task 2.5 Salmonella Infantis and S. Kentucky across reservoirs: role 
of MGEs (M28-M54) 
ISS  (Laura  Villa)  coordinated  a  teleconference  among  task 
participants, in which it was decided to focus on the pESI virulence 
plasmid of Salmonella infantis from animal and human origin. All 
task participants completed a metadata sheet, and samples were 
selected for short-read sequencing which should be completed by 
M36.  It  was  decided  that  each  partner  selects  20-30  S.  Infantis 
isolates from their collection, with maximal diversity in selection 
25/11/2020    Page 
8 

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
(year/source),  and  focusing  on  the  pESI markers:    SMX-TET-SUL  resistance  (NAL/CIP),  and/or the  
presence of IncFIB(pN55391), tet(A), sul1 and dfrA14.  
 
Task 2.6 Evaluation of publicly available and in-house tools for MGE typing (M30-M54) 
This task has not yet been initiated at the time of writing.  
 
 
WP 3: CULTURE-INDEPENDENT TYPING AND METAGENOMICS (M30-M54) 
The development of culture-independent methods to detect, quantify and identify bacterial plasmids 
carrying antimicrobial resistance genes is greatly encouraged for future surveillance efforts. This WP 
will focus on (i) enhanced mining of existing metagenomics data, including those from the EFFORT and 
COMPARE projects, and correlate this to AMR-gene abundance, and (ii) development of diagnostic 
tools for direct identification of MGE/plasmid identifications from various sample types. 
 
Task 3.1 MGE ANALYSES IN METAGENOMIC DATASETS (M30-M54) 
In the first annual year, it was planned to develop, evaluate and make available a database of MGEs 
detection from single isolates and metagenomics datasets. In research performed by Markus H K 
Johansson (DTU, DK), this databases was established and consists of ∼4450 MGE sequences that 
originate from ∼1050 different species. They contain several types of mobile elements:  
•  Insertion sequences (ISs) are among the smallest types of iMGEs. They are often composed of 
a transposase gene flanked by two inverted repeats (IRs). They are notable for their ability to 
modulate gene expression and promote mobility by forming composite transposons (ComTns), 
translocatable units (TUs) and in the case of elements from the IS26 family pseudo-composite 
transposons (PCTs).  
•  Unit transposons (Tns) are generally flanked by IRs and carry a transposase gene. They usually 
carry a resolvase gene, accessory genes and/or additional iMGEs.Miniature Inverted Repeats 
(MITEs) are non-autonomous ISs or Tns that have undergone deletions in their core genes but 
have retained the IR and can form ComTn-like structures. 
•  Integrative  Conjugative  Elements  (ICEs),  Cis-Mobilizable  Elements  (CIMEs)  and  Integrative 
Mobilizable  Elements  (IMEs)  are  larger  iMGEs  capable  of  conjugation.  They  can  either 
conjugate independently or be co-mobilized by conjugation of other elements. These elements 
carry many accessory genes and other MGEs. 
In  the  following  years,  this  database  will  be  updated  and  implemented  in  the  evaluation  of 
bioinformatics pipelines for quantification of MGE in metagenomics datasets, and in determining the 
presence and abundance of MGEs in public and de novo generated metagenomics datasets. 
 
Task 3.2 CULTURE INDEPENDENT METHODS FOR PLASMID IDENTIFICATION (M30-M54) 
Genomic Epidemiology, DTU, DK (Saria Otani et. al.,) has developed a plasmidome-DNA extraction 
protocol from complex biomes (e.g., sewage and faeces). The protocol allows plasmid DNA isolations, 
degrades linear gDNA and enriches circular elements in metagenomics samples. In short, plasmid DNA 
isolation was performed on individual sewage pellets (420 mg) using Plasmid Purification Mini Kit 
(Qiagen, Cat No./ID: 12123) following the manufacturer’s instruction with the following modifications: 
protein precipitation with P3 buffer mixture was incubated on ice for 20 minutes, elution buffer QF 
and EB buffer were preheated at 65°C prior applications, and the DNA pellet washing step was done 
25/11/2020    Page 
9 

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
using ice-cold 70% ethanol after isopropanol precipitation. LyseBlue dye for cell lysis indication was 
added, and all buffer volumes were adjusted to sewage pellet weight. The plasmid DNA pellet was 
dissolved in 25 μl EB buffer for 1 hour at room temperature. Linear chromosomal DNA was reduced by 
Plasmid-Safe ATP-Dependent DNase (Epicentre, USA) treatment for 24 hours at 37°C. The DNase was 
inactivated at 70°C for 30 minutes. Circular DNA was enriched using phi29 DNA polymerase (New 
England Biolabs, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions, similar to as previously described.This 
can  be  combined  with  an  assembly workflow,  utilizing  the  long-read  length of  Oxford  Nanopore 
sequencer.  The  pipeline  was  already  tested  at  DTU  using  sewage  samples  from  22  countries  (5 
continents) as part of DTU global sewage surveillance project. 105 Gpb Oxford Nanopore data were 
obtained and 159.322 circular contigs were assembled. Data annotation is  in progress to further 
validate the pipeline.  
 
 
WP 4: FUNCTIONAL CHARACTERIZATION OF AMR MOBILE GENETIC 
ELEMENTS (MGE)-CARRYING AMR GENES AND BACTERIAL HOST 
ASSOCIATIONS (M25-M54) 
The  overall  goals  of  this WP  are to  (i)  gain  knowledge  on  molecular  mechanisms  of  spread  and 
persistence of main MGEs carrying critically/highly important antimicrobial resistances, (ii) identify key 
molecular  interactions  between  AMR-MGEs  and  bacterial  host  important  for  dissemination  and 
maintenance.  
 
Task 4.1 SELECTION of MGEs and HOST STRAINS FOR DETAILED CHARACTERIZATION (M25-M42) 
Given the delay caused by postponing both the kickoff meeting as well as the workshop on SMRT 
sequencing, it was decided that the selection of MGEs will be performed within tasks 2.1-2.5. Therefore, 
a current focus lies on pESI of S. Infantis, pKpQIL of KPC-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae, IncX3-SHV 
and  IncHI1-CTX-M  plasmids  from  horses,  IncI1-AmpC/ESBL  plasmids  of  E.  coli.  To  allow  smooth 
exchange of reference strains and/or donor-acceptor strains for conjugation experiments, a Material 
Transfer Agreement has been approved by all WP4 partners. A meeting on available reference strains 
and protocol is planned in early 2021. Drafting a common conjugation protocol is in progress that will 
be available on January 2021 for discussion/improvement and then to be shared among involved 
partners.  
 
 
Task 4.2 FUNCTIONAL CHARACTERIZATION of MGEs (M31-M54) 
This task has not yet been initiated at the time of writing.  
 
 
WP 5: MODELLING (M25-M54) 
The objectives of WP5 are to address: i) gaps in quantitative knowledge on the spread of pAMR which 
will be essential to direct future focused research, ii) insight in the uncertainty around the effect of 
measures  reducing  pAMR  prevalence  in the  food  production  chains,  and  iii) identification of  key 
elements in the production chains to mitigate the risk of human exposure. 
 
25/11/2020    Page 
10 

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
Task 5.1 MODEL DESIGN for AMR TRANSMISSION (M25-M42) 
The design of a transmission spread model of pAMR in the simulation framework SimInf has been 
initiated. SVA (Stefan Widgren) has coordinated two teleconferences with task participants. The first 
teleconference  was  a  startup  meeting  and  the  second  teleconference  was  a  meeting  to  discuss 
horizontal vs. vertical AMR transmission. 
A necessary but challenging step in stochastic modelling is to determine parameters such that the 
model generates data that are consistent with observations. Parameterization is preferably conducted 
within a Bayesian framework and in WP5 we are focusing on using Approximate Bayesian computation 
(ABC),  a  recent  computational  approach  for  simulation-based  inference.  In  the  first  annual  year, 
development is underway to add ABC functionality to the open-source SimInf modelling R package 
(https://github.com/stewid/SimInf). The figure below illustrates using ABC in SimInf to fit parameters 
from data of infected chicken broilers published in Dame-Korevar et al. (2017), and a model with 
susceptible (S) and infected (I) chicken, showing (for example) that the ageing parameter has a tighter 
posterior  distribution  compared  to  the  transmission  parameter.  Work  is  ongoing  to  identify  and 
include other sources of broiler data for parameterisation of more complex models. 
 
Task 5.2 EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT of HORIZONTAL and VERTICAL TRANSMITTED AMR (M25-M54) 
This task has not yet been initiated at the time of writing. 
 
25/11/2020    Page 
11 

                         
 
3.  Progress of the project: milestones and deliverables 
 
Project  If  Proposed 
Date 
deliverable  Delivery  deliverable  Is this  category* 
delivered  Comments 
number  Deliverable name  date  not  delay  (1 to 8) 
JRP /JIP  on  (Please mention: public or confidential, 
(Original  (Original name, if different  from  submitted:  due to  (several 
code  Project  the Zenodo reference and other 
number, if  from the actual one)  AWP  Forecast  COVID- categories 
Group  comments) 
different from  2020  delivery  19?  may be 
website 
the actual one)  date  applicable) 
D-JRP14- Confidential due to research updates; 
14  Start-up meeting report  M27  M34    YES  8 
WP0.D1  10.5281/zenodo.4275887 
D-JRP14- Financial and activity report  M36 
The annual 12M will be published on 
14  M36       
WP0.D2  Y3  
time. 
D-JRP14- Recorded webinar tutorial  Public; 
14  M27  M33    YES  3 
WP0.D3  ENA AMR data hub  10.5281/zenodo.4277545 
Teleconference to assess 
D-JRP14- Public; 
14  required protocols and  M25  M26      8 
WP1.D1  10.5281/zenodo.3733393 
infrastructure 
Teleconference to discuss 
D-JRP14- Public; 
14  proposed protocols and  M26  M26      8 
WP1.D2  10.5281/zenodo.3759335 
infrastructure (follow-up) 
Completion of final protocol 
D-JRP14- CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION; 
14  M27  M34    YES  2 
for SMRT sequencing 
WP1.D3  10.5281/zenodo.4277521 
Invitation to workshop 
D-JRP14- Public; 
14  delivered to all participating  M28  M27      8 
WP1.D4  10.5281/zenodo.3693741 
institutions 
Completion of workshop  YES 
D-JRP14- CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION; 
14  organization plan including  M29  M35    8 
WP1.D5  10.5281/zenodo.4290698 
selection of course material 
12 
 

|   JRP /JIP |          | Project         |    | Deliverable name               | Delivery   | Date        |    | If          |    | Is this   | Comments                                   |    | Proposed    |    |
|       code |          |                 |    | (Original name, if different   | date       | delivered   |    |             |    | delay     | (Please mention: public or confidential,   |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | from the actual one)           | from       | on          |    |             |    | due to    | the Zenodo reference and other             |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    |                                | AWP        | Project     |    |             |    | COVID-    | comments)                                  |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    |                                | 2020       | Group       |    |             |    | 19?       |                                            |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    |                                |            | website     |    |             |    |           |                                            |    |             |    |
|-----------:|:---------|:----------------|:---|:-------------------------------|:-----------|:------------|:---|:------------|:---|:----------|:-------------------------------------------|:---|:------------|:---|
|            |          | deliverable     |    |                                |            |             |    | deliverable |    |           |                                            |    | category*   |    |
|            |          | number          |    |                                |            |             |    | not         |    |           |                                            |    | (1 to 8)    |    |
|            |          | (Original       |    |                                |            |             |    | submitted:  |    |           |                                            |    | (several    |    |
|            |          | number, if      |    |                                |            |             |    | Forecast    |    |           |                                            |    | categories  |    |
|            |          | different from  |    |                                |            |             |    | delivery    |    |           |                                            |    | may be      |    |
|            |          | the actual one) |    |                                |            |             |    | date        |    |           |                                            |    | applicable) |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Start-up meeting report        | M27        | M34         |    |             |    | YES       | Confidential due to research updates;      | 8  |             |    |
|            | WP0.D1   |                 |    |                                |            |             |    |             |    |           | 10.5281/zenodo.4275887                     |    |             |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Financial and activity report  | M36        | M36         |    |             |    |           | The annual 12M will be published on        |    |             |    |
|            | WP0.D2   |                 |    | Y3                             |            |             |    |             |    |           | time.                                      |    |             |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Recorded webinar tutorial      | M27        | M33         |    |             |    | YES       | Public;                                    | 3  |             |    |
|            | WP0.D3   |                 |    | ENA AMR data hub               |            |             |    |             |    |           | 10.5281/zenodo.4277545                     |    |             |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Teleconference to assess       | M25        | M26         |    |             |    |           | Public;                                    | 8  |             |    |
|            | WP1.D1   |                 |    | required protocols and         |            |             |    |             |    |           | 10.5281/zenodo.3733393                     |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | infrastructure                 |            |             |    |             |    |           |                                            |    |             |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Teleconference to discuss      | M26        | M26         |    |             |    |           | Public;                                    | 8  |             |    |
|            | WP1.D2   |                 |    | proposed protocols and         |            |             |    |             |    |           | 10.5281/zenodo.3759335                     |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | infrastructure (follow-up)     |            |             |    |             |    |           |                                            |    |             |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Completion of final protocol   | M27        | M34         |    |             |    | YES       | CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION;            | 2  |             |    |
|            | WP1.D3   |                 |    | for SMRT sequencing            |            |             |    |             |    |           | 10.5281/zenodo.4277521                     |    |             |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Invitation to workshop         | M28        | M27         |    |             |    |           | Public;                                    | 8  |             |    |
|            | WP1.D4   |                 |    | delivered to all participating |            |             |    |             |    |           | 10.5281/zenodo.3693741                     |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | institutions                   |            |             |    |             |    |           |                                            |    |             |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Completion of workshop         | M29        | M35         |    |             |    | YES       | CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION;            | 8  |             |    |
|            | WP1.D5   |                 |    | organization plan including    |            |             |    |             |    |           | 10.5281/zenodo.4290698                     |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | selection of course material   |            |             |    |             |    |           |                                            |    |             |    |

| Date      |
|:----------|
| delivered |
| on        |
| Project   |
| Group     |
| website   |

| Delivery   |
|:-----------|
| date       |
| from       |
| AWP        |
| 2020       |

| Is this   |
|:----------|
| delay     |
| due to    |
| COVID-    |
| 19?       |

| Comments                                 |
|:-----------------------------------------|
| (Please mention: public or confidential, |
| the Zenodo reference and other           |
| comments)                                |

| Deliverable name             |
|:-----------------------------|
| (Original name, if different |
| from the actual one)         |

| JRP /JIP   |
|:-----------|
| code       |

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
Project  If  Proposed 
Date 
deliverable  Delivery  deliverable  Is this  category* 
delivered  Comments 
number  Deliverable name  date  not  delay  (1 to 8) 
JRP /JIP  on  (Please mention: public or confidential, 
(Original  (Original name, if different  from  submitted:  due to  (several 
code  Project  the Zenodo reference and other 
number, if  from the actual one)  AWP  Forecast  COVID- categories 
Group  comments) 
different from  2020  delivery  19?  may be 
website 
the actual one)  date  applicable) 
Selection of proficiency test  YES 
D-JRP14- CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION; 
14  M32  M35    8 
data 
WP1.D6  10.5281/zenodo.4290707   
Delivery of analysis results  YES  CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION; 
of proficiency test by  Proficiency test will be organised as 
D-JRP14-
14  partners to SSI  M33    M39  follow-up of the postponed online  8 
WP1.D7 
course. Therefore, this delivery dates 
shifts backwards. 
D-JRP14- Completion of final report of  YES 
Proficiency test is ongoing, but suffered 
14  M36    M46   
WP1.D8  proficiency tests  
from some delays due to COVID-19 
Submission of sequence-  CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION; 
D-JRP14- and metadata of  M38  Given the lab closures in M28-30, we 
14  M33      3 
WP2.D1  longitudinal samples at ENA    expect all short-read sequencing now 
hub  to be done by M38. 
Submission of sequence-  YES  CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION; 
D-JRP14- and metadata of cross- M38  Given the lab closures in M28-30, we 
14  M33    3 
WP2.D2  sectional samples at ENA    expect all short-read sequencing now 
hub  to be done by M38. 
Submission of sequence-  YES  CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION; 
D-JRP14- and metadata of K.    M38  Given the lab closures in M28-30, we 
14  M36  3 
WP2.D3  pneumoniae samples at ENA      expect all short-read sequencing now 
hub  to be done by M38. 
Submission of sequence-    YES  CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION; 
D-JRP14- M38 
14  and metadata of S. enterica  M36    Given the lab closures in M28-30, we  3 
WP2.D4   
samples at ENA hub    expect all short-read sequencing now 
25/11/2020   

|   JRP /JIP |          | Project         |    | Deliverable name               | Delivery   | Date        |     | If          |    | Is this   | Comments                                   |    | Proposed    |    |
|       code |          |                 |    | (Original name, if different   | date       | delivered   |     |             |    | delay     | (Please mention: public or confidential,   |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | from the actual one)           | from       | on          |     |             |    | due to    | the Zenodo reference and other             |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    |                                | AWP        | Project     |     |             |    | COVID-    | comments)                                  |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    |                                | 2020       | Group       |     |             |    | 19?       |                                            |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    |                                |            | website     |     |             |    |           |                                            |    |             |    |
|-----------:|:---------|:----------------|:---|:-------------------------------|:-----------|:------------|:----|:------------|:---|:----------|:-------------------------------------------|:---|:------------|:---|
|            |          | deliverable     |    |                                |            |             |     | deliverable |    |           |                                            |    | category*   |    |
|            |          | number          |    |                                |            |             |     | not         |    |           |                                            |    | (1 to 8)    |    |
|            |          | (Original       |    |                                |            |             |     | submitted:  |    |           |                                            |    | (several    |    |
|            |          | number, if      |    |                                |            |             |     | Forecast    |    |           |                                            |    | categories  |    |
|            |          | different from  |    |                                |            |             |     | delivery    |    |           |                                            |    | may be      |    |
|            |          | the actual one) |    |                                |            |             |     | date        |    |           |                                            |    | applicable) |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Selection of proficiency test  | M32        | M35         |     |             |    | YES       | CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION;            | 8  |             |    |
|            | WP1.D6   |                 |    | data                           |            |             |     |             |    |           | 10.5281/zenodo.4290707                     |    |             |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Delivery of analysis results   | M33        |             | M39 |             |    | YES       | CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION;            | 8  |             |    |
|            | WP1.D7   |                 |    | of proficiency test by         |            |             |     |             |    |           | Proficiency test will be organised as      |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | partners to SSI                |            |             |     |             |    |           | follow-up of the postponed online          |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    |                                |            |             |     |             |    |           | course. Therefore, this delivery dates     |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    |                                |            |             |     |             |    |           | shifts backwards.                          |    |             |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Completion of final report of  | M36        |             | M46 |             |    | YES       | Proficiency test is ongoing, but suffered  |    |             |    |
|            | WP1.D8   |                 |    | proficiency tests              |            |             |     |             |    |           | from some delays due to COVID-19           |    |             |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Submission of sequence-        | M33        |             | M38 |             |    |           | CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION;            | 3  |             |    |
|            | WP2.D1   |                 |    | and metadata of                |            |             |     |             |    |           | Given the lab closures in M28-30, we       |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | longitudinal samples at ENA    |            |             |     |             |    |           | expect all short-read sequencing now       |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | hub                            |            |             |     |             |    |           | to be done by M38.                         |    |             |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Submission of sequence-        | M33        |             | M38 |             |    | YES       | CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION;            | 3  |             |    |
|            | WP2.D2   |                 |    | and metadata of cross-         |            |             |     |             |    |           | Given the lab closures in M28-30, we       |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | sectional samples at ENA       |            |             |     |             |    |           | expect all short-read sequencing now       |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | hub                            |            |             |     |             |    |           | to be done by M38.                         |    |             |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Submission of sequence-        | M36        |             | M38 |             |    | YES       | CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION;            | 3  |             |    |
|            | WP2.D3   |                 |    | and metadata of K.             |            |             |     |             |    |           | Given the lab closures in M28-30, we       |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | pneumoniae samples at ENA      |            |             |     |             |    |           | expect all short-read sequencing now       |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | hub                            |            |             |     |             |    |           | to be done by M38.                         |    |             |    |
|         14 | D-JRP14- |                 |    | Submission of sequence-        | M36        |             | M38 |             |    | YES       | CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION;            | 3  |             |    |
|            | WP2.D4   |                 |    | and metadata of S. enterica    |            |             |     |             |    |           | Given the lab closures in M28-30, we       |    |             |    |
|            |          |                 |    | samples at ENA hub             |            |             |     |             |    |           | expect all short-read sequencing now       |    |             |    |

| Date      |
|:----------|
| delivered |
| on        |
| Project   |
| Group     |
| website   |

| Delivery   |
|:-----------|
| date       |
| from       |
| AWP        |
| 2020       |

| Is this   |
|:----------|
| delay     |
| due to    |
| COVID-    |
| 19?       |

| Comments                                 |
|:-----------------------------------------|
| (Please mention: public or confidential, |
| the Zenodo reference and other           |
| comments)                                |

| Deliverable name             |
|:-----------------------------|
| (Original name, if different |
| from the actual one)         |

| JRP /JIP   |
|:-----------|
| code       |

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
Project  If  Proposed 
Date 
deliverable  Delivery  deliverable  Is this  category* 
delivered  Comments 
number  Deliverable name  date  not  delay  (1 to 8) 
JRP /JIP  on  (Please mention: public or confidential, 
(Original  (Original name, if different  from  submitted:  due to  (several 
code  Project  the Zenodo reference and other 
number, if  from the actual one)  AWP  Forecast  COVID- categories 
Group  comments) 
different from  2020  delivery  19?  may be 
website 
the actual one)  date  applicable) 
to be done by M38. 
Submission of sequence-  YES  CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION; 
 
D-JRP14- and metadata of horse- M38  Given the lab closures in M28-30, we 
14  M36    3 
WP2.D5  related samples at ENA hub    expect all short-read sequencing now 
 
to be done by M38. 
14  D-JRP14- List of relevant publicly  M36  Taskgroup will assembly first time at 
WP2.D6  available and in-house    M42    the beginning of 2021  2 
developed tools.  
14  JRP14-WP3.D1  Database construction  M36  Public;  
M36 
    3 
tailored at MGEs   10.5281/zenodo.4305711 
 
14  D-JRP14- Protocol for plasmid DNA  M34  Delay caused by lab closure, due to 
WP3.D2  extraction from    M42  YES  COVID-19  2 
environmental samples 
First collection of type-
D-JRP14- materials (MGEs and strains)  Taskgroup will assembly first time at 
14  M36    M42    3 
WP4.D1  to be shared between  the beginning of 2021 
involved partners 
Source code of the 
implementation of a SimInf  Public; 
14  D-JRP14-W5.D1  M34  M36      1 
model designed for pAMR  10.5281/zenodo.4305750 
transmission. 
* Categories of Integrative activities : 1. Design and implementation of surveillance and control activities; 2. Harmonised protocols and applied best 
practice; 3. Databases of reference materials and data, incl. metadata; 4. Standardised data formats, aligned data analysis for interpretation of surveillance 
25/11/2020   

| JRP /JIP   |               | Project         |    | Deliverable name               | Delivery   | Date        |     | If          |    | Is this   | Comments                                   |    | Proposed    |    |
| code       |               |                 |    | (Original name, if different   | date       | delivered   |     |             |    | delay     | (Please mention: public or confidential,   |    |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    | from the actual one)           | from       | on          |     |             |    | due to    | the Zenodo reference and other             |    |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    |                                | AWP        | Project     |     |             |    | COVID-    | comments)                                  |    |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    |                                | 2020       | Group       |     |             |    | 19?       |                                            |    |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    |                                |            | website     |     |             |    |           |                                            |    |             |    |
|:-----------|:--------------|:----------------|:---|:-------------------------------|:-----------|:------------|:----|:------------|:---|:----------|:-------------------------------------------|:---|:------------|:---|
|            |               | deliverable     |    |                                |            |             |     | deliverable |    |           |                                            |    | category*   |    |
|            |               | number          |    |                                |            |             |     | not         |    |           |                                            |    | (1 to 8)    |    |
|            |               | (Original       |    |                                |            |             |     | submitted:  |    |           |                                            |    | (several    |    |
|            |               | number, if      |    |                                |            |             |     | Forecast    |    |           |                                            |    | categories  |    |
|            |               | different from  |    |                                |            |             |     | delivery    |    |           |                                            |    | may be      |    |
|            |               | the actual one) |    |                                |            |             |     | date        |    |           |                                            |    | applicable) |    |
|            |               |                 |    |                                |            |             |     |             |    |           | to be done by M38.                         |    |             |    |
| 14         | D-JRP14-      |                 |    | Submission of sequence-        | M36        |             | M38 |             |    | YES       | CONFIDENTIAL UNTIL PUBLICATION;            | 3  |             |    |
|            | WP2.D5        |                 |    | and metadata of horse-         |            |             |     |             |    |           | Given the lab closures in M28-30, we       |    |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    | related samples at ENA hub     |            |             |     |             |    |           | expect all short-read sequencing now       |    |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    |                                |            |             |     |             |    |           | to be done by M38.                         |    |             |    |
| 14         | D-JRP14-      |                 |    | List of relevant publicly      | M36        |             | M42 |             |    |           | Taskgroup will assembly first time at      | 2  |             |    |
|            | WP2.D6        |                 |    | available and in-house         |            |             |     |             |    |           | the beginning of 2021                      |    |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    | developed tools.               |            |             |     |             |    |           |                                            |    |             |    |
| 14         | JRP14-WP3.D1  |                 |    | Database construction          | M36        | M36         |     |             |    |           | Public;                                    | 3  |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    | tailored at MGEs               |            |             |     |             |    |           | 10.5281/zenodo.4305711                     |    |             |    |
| 14         | D-JRP14-      |                 |    | Protocol for plasmid DNA       | M34        |             | M42 |             |    | YES       | Delay caused by lab closure, due to        | 2  |             |    |
|            | WP3.D2        |                 |    | extraction from                |            |             |     |             |    |           | COVID-19                                   |    |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    | environmental samples          |            |             |     |             |    |           |                                            |    |             |    |
| 14         | D-JRP14-      |                 |    | First collection of type-      | M36        |             | M42 |             |    |           | Taskgroup will assembly first time at      | 3  |             |    |
|            | WP4.D1        |                 |    | materials (MGEs and strains)   |            |             |     |             |    |           | the beginning of 2021                      |    |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    | to be shared between           |            |             |     |             |    |           |                                            |    |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    | involved partners              |            |             |     |             |    |           |                                            |    |             |    |
| 14         | D-JRP14-W5.D1 |                 |    | Source code of the             | M34        | M36         |     |             |    |           | Public;                                    | 1  |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    | implementation of a SimInf     |            |             |     |             |    |           | 10.5281/zenodo.4305750                     |    |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    | model designed for pAMR        |            |             |     |             |    |           |                                            |    |             |    |
|            |               |                 |    | transmission.                  |            |             |     |             |    |           |                                            |    |             |    |

| Date      |
|:----------|
| delivered |
| on        |
| Project   |
| Group     |
| website   |

| Delivery   |
|:-----------|
| date       |
| from       |
| AWP        |
| 2020       |

| Is this   |
|:----------|
| delay     |
| due to    |
| COVID-    |
| 19?       |

| Comments                                 |
|:-----------------------------------------|
| (Please mention: public or confidential, |
| the Zenodo reference and other           |
| comments)                                |

| Deliverable name             |
|:-----------------------------|
| (Original name, if different |
| from the actual one)         |

| JRP /JIP   |
|:-----------|
| code       |

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
data; 5. Sharing and communication of surveillance data; 6. Sharing of best intervention activities ; 7. Prevention: aligned use of facilities and models; 8. 
Other (please specify);  
 
 
25/11/2020   

                         
 
Milestones 
 
If not 
Delivery 
achieved: 
Milestone  date from  Achieved 
JRP/JIPCode  Milestone name  Forecast  Comments 
number  AWP  (Yes/No) 
achievement 
2020 
date 
M-JRP14- Creation of specific data  Password-protected data hubs for each 
14  M1  hubs in ENA AMR hub   M27  Yes    individual task were created at OwnCloud 
(not ENA) 
M-JRP14- A teleconference or physical 
14  M2  meeting on horizontal vs.  M27  Yes     
vertical AMR transmission  
M-JRP14- Selection of MGEs and host 
14  M28  Yes     
M3  strains to be studied T4.2  
M-JRP14- A teleconference or physical   
M4  meeting on input/output  Yes 
14  M29     
relationship between SimInf 
and sQMRA  
M-JRP14- Publication of first version of  Yes 
14  M30     
M5  data management plan  
M-JRP14- 3-days workshop on SMRT 
14  M30  Yes     
M6  sequencing event  
M-JRP14- Shipment of proficiency test 
14  M32  Yes     
M7  data and strains  
M-JRP14- Sharing of protocols, 
   M8  recipient- and host-strains,  M33  No  M42  Due to delays in WP2 
molecular tools  
16 
 

| JRP/JIPCode   | Milestone   | Milestone name                  | Delivery    | Achieved   |     | If not      |    | Comments                                 |
|               | number      |                                 | date from   | (Yes/No)   |     |             |    |                                          |
|               |             |                                 | AWP         |            |     |             |    |                                          |
|               |             |                                 | 2020        |            |     |             |    |                                          |
|:--------------|:------------|:--------------------------------|:------------|:-----------|:----|:------------|:---|:-----------------------------------------|
|               |             |                                 |             |            |     | achieved:   |    |                                          |
|               |             |                                 |             |            |     | Forecast    |    |                                          |
|               |             |                                 |             |            |     | achievement |    |                                          |
|               |             |                                 |             |            |     | date        |    |                                          |
| 14            | M-JRP14-    | Creation of specific data       | M27         | Yes        |     |             |    | Password-protected data hubs for each    |
|               | M1          | hubs in ENA AMR hub             |             |            |     |             |    | individual task were created at OwnCloud |
|               |             |                                 |             |            |     |             |    | (not ENA)                                |
| 14            | M-JRP14-    | A teleconference or physical    | M27         | Yes        |     |             |    |                                          |
|               | M2          | meeting on horizontal vs.       |             |            |     |             |    |                                          |
|               |             | vertical AMR transmission       |             |            |     |             |    |                                          |
| 14            | M-JRP14-    | Selection of MGEs and host      | M28         | Yes        |     |             |    |                                          |
|               | M3          | strains to be studied T4.2      |             |            |     |             |    |                                          |
| 14            | M-JRP14-    | A teleconference or physical    | M29         | Yes        |     |             |    |                                          |
|               | M4          | meeting on input/output         |             |            |     |             |    |                                          |
|               |             | relationship between SimInf     |             |            |     |             |    |                                          |
|               |             | and sQMRA                       |             |            |     |             |    |                                          |
| 14            | M-JRP14-    | Publication of first version of | M30         | Yes        |     |             |    |                                          |
|               | M5          | data management plan            |             |            |     |             |    |                                          |
| 14            | M-JRP14-    | 3-days workshop on SMRT         | M30         | Yes        |     |             |    |                                          |
|               | M6          | sequencing event                |             |            |     |             |    |                                          |
| 14            | M-JRP14-    | Shipment of proficiency test    | M32         | Yes        |     |             |    |                                          |
|               | M7          | data and strains                |             |            |     |             |    |                                          |
|               | M-JRP14-    | Sharing of protocols,           | M33         | No         | M42 |             |    | Due to delays in WP2                     |
|               | M8          | recipient- and host-strains,    |             |            |     |             |    |                                          |
|               |             | molecular tools                 |             |            |     |             |    |                                          |

| Delivery   |
|:-----------|
| date from  |
| AWP        |
| 2020       |

| Milestone   |
|:------------|
| number      |

| Achieved   |
|:-----------|
| (Yes/No)   |

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
If not 
Delivery 
achieved: 
Milestone  date from  Achieved 
JRP/JIPCode  Milestone name  Forecast  Comments 
number  AWP  (Yes/No) 
achievement 
2020 
date 
M-JRP14- An implementation of a 
M9  SimInf model designed for 
14  M33  Yes     
pAMR transmission to be 
studied in T5.1  
M-JRP14- Final selection of  M34  
Will be based on phylogenetic analyses of 
14  M10  longitudinal samples for  No  M39 
short-read data, foreseen for M39 
SMRT sequencing  
M-JRP14- Final selection of cross- M34  
Will be based on phylogenetic analyses of 
14  M11  sectional samples for SMRT  No  M39 
short-read data, foreseen for M39 
sequencing  
M-JRP14- Final selection of K.  M34  
Will be based on phylogenetic analyses of 
14  M12  pneumoniae samples for  No  M39 
short-read data, foreseen for M39 
SMRT sequencing  
M-JRP14- Final selection of S. enterica  M34  
Will be based on phylogenetic analyses of 
14  M13  samples for SMRT  No  M39 
short-read data, foreseen for M39 
sequencing  
M-JRP14- Final selection of horse- M34  
Will be based on phylogenetic analyses of 
14  M14  related samples for SMRT  No  M39 
short-read data, foreseen for M39 
sequencing  
M-JRP14- Analysis of proficiency test  M35   No   M38  New deadline for proficiency test 
14 
M15  data by all partners  
M-JRP14- Individual reports of  M36   No   M40  Update reporting date 
14  M16   proficiency test sent to 
partners  
M-JRP14- Successful adaptation of  M36   No  M42  Delay due to lab closure (COVID-19) 
14  M17   plasmid purification protocol 
to field samples  
25/11/2020   

|   JRP/JIPCode | Milestone   | Milestone name                 | Delivery    | Achieved   |     | If not      |    | Comments                                  |
|               | number      |                                | date from   | (Yes/No)   |     |             |    |                                           |
|               |             |                                | AWP         |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|               |             |                                | 2020        |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|--------------:|:------------|:-------------------------------|:------------|:-----------|:----|:------------|:---|:------------------------------------------|
|               |             |                                |             |            |     | achieved:   |    |                                           |
|               |             |                                |             |            |     | Forecast    |    |                                           |
|               |             |                                |             |            |     | achievement |    |                                           |
|               |             |                                |             |            |     | date        |    |                                           |
|            14 | M-JRP14-    | An implementation of a         | M33         | Yes        |     |             |    |                                           |
|               | M9          | SimInf model designed for      |             |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|               |             | pAMR transmission to be        |             |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|               |             | studied in T5.1                |             |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|            14 | M-JRP14-    | Final selection of             | M34         | No         | M39 |             |    | Will be based on phylogenetic analyses of |
|               | M10         | longitudinal samples for       |             |            |     |             |    | short-read data, foreseen for M39         |
|               |             | SMRT sequencing                |             |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|            14 | M-JRP14-    | Final selection of cross-      | M34         | No         | M39 |             |    | Will be based on phylogenetic analyses of |
|               | M11         | sectional samples for SMRT     |             |            |     |             |    | short-read data, foreseen for M39         |
|               |             | sequencing                     |             |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|            14 | M-JRP14-    | Final selection of K.          | M34         | No         | M39 |             |    | Will be based on phylogenetic analyses of |
|               | M12         | pneumoniae samples for         |             |            |     |             |    | short-read data, foreseen for M39         |
|               |             | SMRT sequencing                |             |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|            14 | M-JRP14-    | Final selection of S. enterica | M34         | No         | M39 |             |    | Will be based on phylogenetic analyses of |
|               | M13         | samples for SMRT               |             |            |     |             |    | short-read data, foreseen for M39         |
|               |             | sequencing                     |             |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|            14 | M-JRP14-    | Final selection of horse-      | M34         | No         | M39 |             |    | Will be based on phylogenetic analyses of |
|               | M14         | related samples for SMRT       |             |            |     |             |    | short-read data, foreseen for M39         |
|               |             | sequencing                     |             |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|            14 | M-JRP14-    | Analysis of proficiency test   | M35         | No         | M38 |             |    | New deadline for proficiency test         |
|               | M15         | data by all partners           |             |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|            14 | M-JRP14-    | Individual reports of          | M36         | No         | M40 |             |    | Update reporting date                     |
|               | M16         | proficiency test sent to       |             |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|               |             | partners                       |             |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|            14 | M-JRP14-    | Successful adaptation of       | M36         | No         | M42 |             |    | Delay due to lab closure (COVID-19)       |
|               | M17         | plasmid purification protocol  |             |            |     |             |    |                                           |
|               |             | to field samples               |             |            |     |             |    |                                           |

| Delivery   |
|:-----------|
| date from  |
| AWP        |
| 2020       |

| Milestone   |
|:------------|
| number      |

| Achieved   |
|:-----------|
| (Yes/No)   |

                         
 
4.  Publications and additional outputs 
 
No publications & additional output thus far.  
 
5.  On-going and planned collaborations with national or European 
projects or networks 
−  The SOLIDNESS network (JPIAMR, 2019-2020) which grouped experts in sequencing, plasmid 
biology and bioinformatics, and aims to streamline procedures for MGE sequencing. We 
build on their expertise to organise the PT.   
−  Cross-sectional and longitudinal bacterial samples of ENGAGE, EFFORT (Horizon 2020, 2013-
2018) and ARDIG (OHEJP, JRP2, 2018-2020) projects will be selected for long-read 
sequencing during WP2. 
−  The KENTUCKY PhD project (OHEJP, 2020-2022) will use fully sequenced S. Kentucky strains 
(T2.4) to focus on the cell biology behind MGE transfer.  
−  Potential collaborations with ECDC and EFSA might be envisioned, for sustainable 
implementation of long-read sequencing technology in surveillance of AMR in Europe.  
 
6.  Data Management Plan 
 
1.  Have you uploaded a first version of the project´s DMP to the DMP group on the OHEJP 
website?  
 
In  September  2020,  a  new  Data 
Management Platform based on the CDP 
software  was  embraced  by  OHEJP.  Full 
Force’s  PI  followed  the  training 
coordinated by the EJP WP4 responsible, 
Géraldine  Boseret.  In  September 2020,  a 
complete DMP of Full Force was created 
and  uploaded  to 
https://apps.lisam.com/app/#Apps/CDP. This plan will be updated annualy. As important part of the 
DMP, a framework agreement on Material Transfer was drafted, circulated and signed among all 18 
participating institutions. This agreement covers all transfer of data and strains during Full Force.  
2.  Have you encountered any problems or difficulties when setting up and updating the DMP? 
If yes, please specify. 
No, thanks to great assistance of Ms. Boseret. 
18 
 

                         
 
7.  Follow-up of the recommendations and comments in previous review(s) by the Ethics Advisors 
WP3/WP4 Team pre-filled the table below with available information. Please clearly explain the actions and measures that have been taken to comply 
with the recommendations you received from the Ethics Advisors 
 
Requirements of ethical  What measures and  Comments of  Comments 
Comments of Ethics  Comments Project 
reviewers in 2020  actions do you  Ethics  Project 
Advisors, December  Leaders, January 
propose? 
Advisors,  Leaders, 
2020  2021 
October 2021  January 2022 
Human  biological  No  human  samples  Satisfactory  reply.  No change so far.      
samples.  will be collected in the  Please  update  your 
As ‘spread of AMR will be  context  of  this  study.  ethical submission if 
investigated  in  people  We will only re-analyse  this  should  change 
living in proximity to farms’  DNA  extracted  from  in any way 
(p14/26), the beneficiaries  bacterial strains in our 
must  confirm  that,  if  stocks. 
relevant,  appropriate 
authorizations  will  be 
sought  to  collect  human 
samples. 
19 
 

| Requirements of ethical       | What measures and        | Comments of Ethics    | Comments Project   |    | Comments of   |    |    | Comments     |    |
| reviewers in 2020             | actions do you           | Advisors, December    | Leaders, January   |    |               |    |    |              |    |
|                               | propose?                 | 2020                  | 2021               |    |               |    |    |              |    |
|:------------------------------|:-------------------------|:----------------------|:-------------------|:---|:--------------|:---|:---|:-------------|:---|
|                               |                          |                       |                    |    | Ethics        |    |    | Project      |    |
|                               |                          |                       |                    |    | Advisors,     |    |    | Leaders,     |    |
|                               |                          |                       |                    |    | October 2021  |    |    | January 2022 |    |
| Human biological              | No human samples         | Satisfactory reply.   | No change so far.  |    |               |    |    |              |    |
| samples.                      | will be collected in the | Please update your    |                    |    |               |    |    |              |    |
| As ‘spread of AMR will be     | context of this study.   | ethical submission if |                    |    |               |    |    |              |    |
| investigated in people        | We will only re-analyse  | this should change    |                    |    |               |    |    |              |    |
| living in proximity to farms’ | DNA extracted from       | in any way            |                    |    |               |    |    |              |    |
| (p14/26), the beneficiaries   | bacterial strains in our |                       |                    |    |               |    |    |              |    |
| must confirm that, if         | stocks.                  |                       |                    |    |               |    |    |              |    |
| relevant, appropriate         |                          |                       |                    |    |               |    |    |              |    |
| authorizations will be        |                          |                       |                    |    |               |    |    |              |    |
| sought to collect human       |                          |                       |                    |    |               |    |    |              |    |
| samples.                      |                          |                       |                    |    |               |    |    |              |    |

| Requirements of ethical   |
|:--------------------------|
| reviewers in 2020         |

| What measures and   |
|:--------------------|
| actions do you      |
| propose?            |

| Comments of Ethics   |
|:---------------------|
| Advisors, December   |
| 2020                 |

| Comments Project   |
|:-------------------|
| Leaders, January   |
| 2021               |

                         
 
8.  List of critical risks 
Please indicate possible risk within your JRP/JIP 
 
Description of risk  Yes/No 
Loss of key-persons (staff and / or leaders)  No 
Delay in work plan execution  Yes 
Conflicts within the consortium  No 
Lack of commitment of partners  No 
Delay in duties, tasks or reporting   Yes 
Poor intra-project relationship  No 
Potential entry/exit of partners  No 
Other risks (please describe)  No 
 
Additional information 
 
 
20 
 

|                                              | Description of risk   |    |     | Yes/No   |    |
|:---------------------------------------------|:----------------------|:---|:----|:---------|:---|
| Loss of key-persons (staff and / or leaders) |                       |    | No  |          |    |
| Delay in work plan execution                 |                       |    | Yes |          |    |
| Conflicts within the consortium              |                       |    | No  |          |    |
| Lack of commitment of partners               |                       |    | No  |          |    |
| Delay in duties, tasks or reporting          |                       |    | Yes |          |    |
| Poor intra-project relationship              |                       |    | No  |          |    |
| Potential entry/exit of partners             |                       |    | No  |          |    |
| Other risks (please describe)                |                       |    | No  |          |    |

                         
 
9.  List of dissemination and communication activities 
Please fill in one table per event you attended/organised in 2020. You should also register these 
activities online on the OneHealth EJP webpage : https://onehealthejp.eu/internal-events-survey/  
 
 
Name of the activity: 
 
Date: 
 
Place: 
Specify the Dissemination and Communication activities linked to the One Health EJP project 
for each of the following categories 
   
Yes / No  Yes / No 
Organisation of a Conference     Participation to a Conference    
Organisation of a Workshop     Participation to a Workshop    
Press release     Participation to an Event    
other than a Conference or a 
Workshop 
Non-scientific and non-peer-    Video/Film    
reviewed publication (popularised 
publication) 
Exhibition     Brokerage Event    
Flyer     Pitch Event    
Training     Trade Fair    
Social Media     Participation in activities    
organized jointly with other 
H2020 projects 
Website     Other    
Communication Campaign (e.g.         
Radio, TV) 
Specify the estimated number of persons reached, in the context of this dissemination and 
communication activity), in each of the following categories 
   
Number  Number 
Scientific Community (Higher    Media    
Education, Research) 
Industry    Investors    
Civil Society    Customers    
General Public    Other    
 
Policy Makers      
 
21 
 

|               | Name of the activity:                                                                       | None                 | None   |    |    | None     | None   | None       | None                          | None   | None   | None     | None   |
|:--------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------|:-------|:---|:---|:---------|:-------|:-----------|:------------------------------|:-------|:-------|:---------|:-------|
|               | Date:                                                                                       |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            |                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Place:                                                                                      |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            |                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Specify the Dissemination and Communication activities linked to the One Health EJP project |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            |                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | for each of the                                                                             | following categories |        |    |    |          |        |            |                               |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                             |                      |        |    |    | Yes / No |        |            |                               |        |        | Yes / No |        |
|               | Organisation of a Conference                                                                |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | Participation to a Conference |        |        |          |        |
|               | Organisation of a Workshop                                                                  |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | Participation to a Workshop   |        |        |          |        |
| Press release | Press release                                                                               |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | Participation to an Event     |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                             |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | other than a Conference or a  |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                             |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | Workshop                      |        |        |          |        |
|               | Non-scientific and non-peer-                                                                |                      |        |    |    |          |        | Video/Film | Video/Film                    |        |        |          |        |
|               | reviewed publication (popularised                                                           |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            |                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | publication)                                                                                |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            |                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Exhibition                                                                                  |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | Brokerage Event               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Flyer                                                                                       |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | Pitch Event                   |        |        |          |        |
|               | Training                                                                                    |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | Trade Fair                    |        |        |          |        |
| Social Media  | Social Media                                                                                |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | Participation in activities   |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                             |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | organized jointly with other  |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                             |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | H2020 projects                |        |        |          |        |
|               | Website                                                                                     |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | Other                         |        |        |          |        |
|               | Communication Campaign (e.g.                                                                |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            |                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Radio, TV)                                                                                  |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            |                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Specify the estimated number of persons reached, in the context of this dissemination and   |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            |                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | communication activity), in each of the following categories                                |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            |                               |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                             |                      |        |    |    | Number   |        |            |                               |        |        | Number   |        |
|               | Scientific Community (Higher                                                                |                      |        |    |    |          |        | Media      |                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Education, Research)                                                                        |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            |                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Industry                                                                                    |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | Investors                     |        |        |          |        |
|               | Civil Society                                                                               |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | Customers                     |        |        |          |        |
|               | General Public                                                                              |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            | Other                         |        |        |          |        |
|               | Policy Makers                                                                               |                      |        |    |    |          |        |            |                               |        |        |          |        |