Draft version July 18, 2018
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 5/2/11
A 3D BABCOCK-LEIGHTON SOLAR DYNAMO MODEL
Mark S. Miesch and Mausumi Dikpati
High Altitude Observatory, National Center for Atmospheric Research, 3080 Center Green, Boulder, CO 80307-3000.
Draft version July 18, 2018
ABSTRACT
We present a 3D kinematic solar dynamo model in which poloidal field is generated by the emergence
and dispersal of tilted sunspot pairs (more generally Bipolar Magnetic Regions, or BMRs). The
4102 naJ 52  ]RS.hp-ortsa[  1v7556.1041:viXra
axisymmetric component of this model functions similarly to previous 2D Babcock-Leighton (BL)
dynamo models that employ a double-ring prescription for poloidal field generation but we generalize
this prescription into a 3D flux emergence algorithm that places BMRs on the surface in response to
the dynamo-generated toroidal field. In this way, the model can be regarded as a unification of BL
dynamo models (2D in radius/latitude) and surface flux transport models (2D in latitude/longitude)
into a more self-consistent framework that captures the full 3D structure of the evolving magnetic
field. The model reproduces some basic features of the solar cycle including an 11-yr periodicity,
equatorward migration of toroidal flux in the deep convection zone, and poleward propagation of
poloidal flux at the surface. The poleward-propagating surface flux originates as trailing flux in
BMRs, migrates poleward in multiple non-axisymmetric streams (made axisymmetric by differential
rotation and turbulent diffusion), and eventually reverses the polar field, thus sustaining the dynamo.
In this letter we briefly describe the model, initial results, and future plans.
Subject headings: Sun: dynamo—Sun: interior—Sun: activity—sunspots
1. INTRODUCTION ers, but its amplitude is proportional to the strength of
the toroidal field near the bottom of the convection zone
Babcock (1961) was the first to describe how the emer-
(CZ). The 2D (axisymmetric) MHD induction equation
gence of toroidal magnetic flux through the solar surface
is then solved to follow the evolution of kinematic, ax-
and the subsequent evolution of that flux can produce a
isymmetric (longitudinally-averaged) mean fields.
large-scale poloidal magnetic field. Furthermore, he ar-
Another milestone in model development was to re-
gued that this process, together with the generation of
place the non-local α-effect with a more phenomenologi-
toroidal field by differential rotation (the Ω-effect) gives
cal representation of tilted sunspot pairs. This was orig-
rise to the 11-yr solar activity cycle. Later work begin-
inally done in an axisymmetric context through Dur-
ning with Leighton (1964, 1969) fleshed out Babcock’s
ney’s (1997) double-ring algorithm which represents a
vision and transformed it into viable numerical dynamo
tilted sunspot pair as two overlapping toroidal rings
models of the solar cycle.
with opposite polarity. This algorithm was later ex-
Though many alternative solar dynamo models have
tended and implemented into 2D BL/FT dynamo models
been proposed, the Babcock-Leighton (BL) paradigm
by Nandy & Choudhuri (2001), Munoz-Jaramillo et al.
has remained compelling because it is firmly grounded
(2010) and Guerrero et al. (2012).
in solar observations and provides a robust mechanism
A more sophisticated 3D flux emergence algorithm was
for producing cyclic dynamo activity (see reviews by
recently presented by Yeates & Munoz-Jaramillo (2013;
Dikpati & Gilman 2009; Charbonneau 2010). One of
hereafter YM13). To our knowledge, this is the first use
the major milestones in model development occurred in
of a fully 3D Babcock-Leighton source term. In their
the 1990s when meridional circulation was included and
model, YM13 model flux emergence through an imposed
was shown to play a crucial role in regulating the cy-
helical flow that lifts and twists the dynamo-generated
cle period and other cycle features such as the poleward
toroidal field such that it emerges through the surface
drift of photospheric flux and the phasing of polar field
and then evolves according to the action of turbulent
reversals (Wang & Sheeley 1991; Choudhuri et al. 1995;
diffusion and mean fields.
Dikpati & Charbonneau 1999). In recognition of the
Here we explore an alternative approach to a 3D kine-
importance of flux transport by meridional circulation,
matic BL/FT model. Rather than imposing a flow to
these new BL models were christened Flux-Transport
advect the magnetic field upward as in YM13, we place
(FT) dynamo models and remain popular today.
a spot pair (or, more generally a Bipolar Magnetic Re-
Though they ostensibly rely on flux emergence and
gion, or BMR; cf. YM13) confined to the surface lay-
evolution in order to operate, most early BL/FT models
ers above the position where the subsurface toroidal flux
did not explicitly include sunspots. instead, the gener-
peaks. Since the mean-field component of the 3D induc-
ation of poloidal field through the BL mechanism was
tion equation is equivalent to a corresponding double-
represented as an idealized axisymmetric source term
ring algorithm, this approach makes closer contact with
in the poloidal component of the magnetohydrodynamic
previous 2D (latitude-radius) BL/FT dynamo models.
(MHD) induction equation. This BL source term is often
Furthermore, Since the emergent field is confined to the
nonlocal in the sense that it is confined to the surface lay-
surface layers, it makes closer contact with a seperate
miesch@ucar.edu class of models known as surface flux transport (SFT)

2 Miesch and Dikpati
models that follow the 2D (latitude/longitude) evolu- of the ASH code uses a fourth-order finite difference for-
tion of emergent flux in the solar photosphere subject mulation in the radial dimension.
to mean flows and turbulent diffusion (Leighton 1964; The differential rotation and meridional circulation
v
Wang & Sheeley 1991; Schrijver 2001; Baumann et al. that comprise are expressed in terms of an angular
2006). velocity profile Ω(θ,r) and a mass flux stream flunction
In summary, our model is a unification of BL/FT dy- Ψ(θ,r) with the same formulations and parameter values
namo models and SFT models. Though it is not the used in the 2D models of Dikpati (2011). For the turbu-
first such unification (see Munoz-Jaramillo et al. 2010, lent diffusion η we use the two-step profile described by
t
YM13), it is a promising approach that we intend to pur- Dikpati & Gilman (2007).
sue in the future to study the 3D evolution of the cyclic
solar magnetic field and its coupling to the corona and
3. FLUX EMERGENCE ALGORITHM: SPOTMAKER
heliosphere. We describe the basic model components
Our objective is to construct a solar dynamo model
in 2 and the flux emergence algorithm in 3. We then
§ § that captures both the solar activity cycle and the ob-
present illustrative results, conclusions, and future plans
served evolution of large-scale magnetic flux solar sur-
in 4.
§ face. However, capturing the full complexity of active re-
gion formation and dispersal through is currently beyond
2. DEVELOPMENT OF 3D BABCOCK-LEIGHTON
the capability of a single numerical dynamo model. Here
DYNAMO MODEL
we use an idealized flux emergence algorithm to place
Building on the success of previous 2D BL/FT dynamo
spots on the solar surface in response to the dynamo-
models, we construct a 3D solar dynamo model by solv-
generated toroidal field near the base of the CZ. As men-
ing the MHD induction equation in the kinematic limit
tioned in 1 this algorithm can be regarded as a 3D gen-
§
B eralization of the axisymmetric double-ring algorithm of
∂
= ∇× (v×B η ∇×B ) (1) Durney (1997) and Munoz-Jaramillo et al. (2010).
t
∂t −
The first step in the algorithm is to define a spot-
producing toroidal flux near the base of the CZ as follows
where η (r) is a turbulent diffusion, and solar velocity
t
fields are specified based on photospheric observations
rb
and helioseismic inversions. We use spherical polar co- ˆ
B (θ,φ,t) = h(r)B (r,θ,φ,t)dr (2)
φ φ
ordinates (r,θ,φ) throughout. Unlike many mean-field Z
ra
dynamo models, we do not include an explicit α-effect.
Instead, the dynamo is sustained by the appearance and where h(r) = h (r r )(r r) and h is defined such
0 a b 0
rb 1.− s−
evolution of sunspot pairs (BMRs) which are placed on that h(r)dr = This is imilar to analogous expres-
ra
the surface in response to the dynamo-generated field by
sionsRused by Rempel (2006), but unlike previous models,
the “Spotmaker” algorithm described in 3.
ˆ
velocit§ v the flux B φ(θ,φ,t) is not necessarily axisymmetric; longi-
In this introductory paper, the y field is ax-
tudinal structure is permitted in the toroidal bands that
isymmetric, consisting only of differential rotation and
give rise to active regions.
meridional circulation. In this case the evolution of
The next step is to suppress sunspot formation at high
B
the mean field (brackets denote an average over
h i latitudes. This is empirically motivated but may have a
longitude, φ) is independent of modes with higher az-
dynamical explanation in terms of the disruption of high-
imuthal wavenumbers (m > 0). This can be veri-
latitude toroidal flux systems by the magneto-rotational
fied by averaging eq. (1) over longitude. Thus, from
instability (Parfrey & Menou 2007). We accomplish this
the perspective of the mean fields, the Spotmaker algo-
ˆ
by applying a mask to B (θ,φ,t) such that
rithm is equivalent to the the double-ring approach used φ
in previous 2D BL/FT dynamo models (Durney 1997;
2g sinθcosθ
Nandy & Choudhuri 2001; Munoz-Jaramillo et al. 2010; ∗ 0 ˆ
B (θ,φ,t) = | | B(θ,φ,t) , (3)
′
Guerrero et al. 2012), though details such as the spatial 1 + exp[ γ θ ]
s
−
profiles and temporal cadence of the spot appearances
′
are different. We view this as beneficial at this stage where θ = θ π/4 in the northern hemisphere (NH)
−
in the model development because it allows us to make and 3π/4 θ in the southern hemisphere (SH). Here we
−
direct contact with existing 2D BL/FT models. Future use γ = 30 and choose the normalization g such that
s 0
modeling will incorporate non-axisymmetric flow fields the maximum value of the masking function is unity (see
and nonlinear feedbacks (see 4) which will break this Dikpati et al. 2004).
§
degeneracy with 2D models but for now it provides an The placement of a spot pair in latitude and longitude
∗
auspicious framework to build upon previous work. is given by the location where the amplitude of B (θ,φ,t)
The framework of the model is built upon the is maximum. If this occurs over a broad range of longi-
ASH (Anelastic Spherical Harmonic) code described by tude (for example, from axisymmetric initial conditions),
Clune et al. (1999) and Brun et al. (2004). ASH is a then a longitude is chosen at random from those locations
∗
workhorse code that has been applied extensively to sim- where B (θ,φ,t) is within 0.1% of its peak value.
∗
ulate solar and stellar convection (see Miesch 2005; Brun A spot is placed if the maximum amplitude of B ex-
2010) but here we use it in a kinematic mode to solve only ceeds a threshold value B . However, in order to avoid
t
the induction equation. The numerical method is pseu- introducing overlapping spots at every time step, a time
dospectral, with a triangularly-truncated spherical har- delay is also required. This can be loosely regarded as
monic decomposition in the horizontal dimensions and a dynamical adjustment time between flux emergence
mixed semi-implicit/explicit timestepping. This version events. Here we use a cumulative lognormal distribution

3D BABCOCK-LEIGHTON DYNAMO 3
a
Fig. 1.— Structure of a spot pair generated by the flux emergence algorithm, Spotmaker. ( ) orthographic projection of radial
field at the solar surface illustrating a mid-latitude spot with a Joy’s law tilt. Blue and red denote inward and outward field
b
respectively. ( ) Mean (axisymmetric) component of the poloidal field associated with the tilted spot pair. Colors and contours
correspond to the magnetic potential Γ, with blue denoting a counter-clockwise field orientation. Here the penetration radius
r . R
= 0 95 .
p
function defined as supercritical dynamo action. Solar observations suggest
Φ 1, implying a flux of 1023 Mx in the strongest
1 ln∆ µ 0
∼
(∆) = 1 erf − . (4) active regions but for the preliminary proof-of-concept
C 2 (cid:20) − (cid:18)− σ√2 (cid:19)(cid:21)
models presented here, we use fewer, stronger spots, with
where ∆ = t t s is the time lag since the last appearance Φ 0 = 200, τ p = 400 days, and τ s = 600 days. Typically
− we specify the spot strength as an input parameter B =
of a spot, t , and µ and σ are parameters related to s
s
the mean time between spots, τ and the mode of the 3000 Φ G and set r = (Φ /B )1/2. However, we often
s 0 s s s
distribution, τ as follows: find it practical to set minumum and maximum values
p
for r (here 8-43 Mm), and then adjust B accordingly
s s
2
σ2 = [ln(τ ) ln(τ )] and µ = lnτ +σ2 . (5) to give the desired flux. For Φ 0 = 200, this preliminary
s p p
3 − procedure yields artificially strong spots of 600-1500 kG.
∗ Future models will incorporate more realistic spot/BMR
Spots are placed if max(B ) > B and (∆) z, where
t
C ≥ distributions.
z is a random number chosen every time step. Seperate
∗ The 3D structure of the field in a given spot pair is
records of B and t are kept for each hemisphere and
s
computed by doing a potential field extrapolation below
separate random numbers z are chosen.
B ∇
the surface, (r,θ,φ) = Γ where
After deciding where and when a spot pair should spot
be placed, the next step is to specify its 2D (lati-
tude,longitude) profile on the solar surface which we Γ(r,θ,φ) = a rℓ + b r−(ℓ+1) Y (θ,φ) . (8)
ℓm ℓm ℓm
write as X(cid:16) (cid:17)
ℓm
B (θ,φ) = B [g (θ,φ) g (θ,φ)] (6) The coefficients a and b are chosen such that
R s T L ℓm ℓm
S −
B (r,θ,φ) = B (θ,φ) at r = R and B = 0 for r r ,
∗ r R r p
where is the sign of B at the (co)latitude and longi- ≤
where r is an input parameter representing the ini-
S p
tude of the spot pair, θ and φ . The functions g (θ,φ)
s s L tial penetration depth of active regions. Here we use
and g (θ,φ) are Gaussian or polynomial profiles defining
T r = 0.95R.
p
the leading and trailing spots. For example, g (θ,φ) =
L We do not expect the subsurface field structure of ac-
1 3s2+2s3 for s 1 where s2r2 = (θ θ )2+(φ φ )2
s L L tual sunspots to be potential. However, equation (8) is
− ≤ − −
and r is the angular radius of each spot (see below). A
s easy to implement and it makes close contact with pre-
similar expression holds for g (θ,φ).
T vious axisymmetric BL solar dynamo models in which
Each spot pair is given a tilt in accordance with Joy’s
the BL source term is assumed to be confined to the
law, as seen in solar observations; δ = δ cosθ where
0 surface layers. This is justified by solar observations
◦ ◦
δ = 32 .1 0 .7 (Stenflo & Kosovichev2012). This gives
0 and modeling efforts that suggest active regions decou-
±
θ = θ s sinδ and φ = φ s cosδ. The angular
L/T s r L/T s r ple from their roots within a few days after emergence
± ±
distance between spots, s , is an input parameter (here (Schu¨ssler & Rempel 2005), a time short compared to
r
equal to 3 r s). For an illustration of the resulting surface the 11-yr solar activity cycle. The other limit, in which
field see Fig. 1a. active regions remain anchored to progenitor fields in the
The field strength B and radius r of the spot pair are lower CZ and tachocline after emergence, will be consid-
s s
determined by the flux content ered in future work (see also YM13).
Bˆ (θ ,φ ,t) 1023
Φ = 2Φ | s s | Mx = B r2 . 4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
s 0 B q 1 + (Bˆ (θ,φ)/B q)2 s s Fig. 2 highlights magnetic cycles achieved in a solar
(7) dynamo simulation represented in terms of butterfly dia-
Here B is a quenching field strength (here 105 G) and Φ grams. Shown are the mean radial field near the surface
q 0
is an amplification factor that can be adjusted to promote (Fig. 2a) and the mean toroidal field near the base of

4 Miesch and Dikpati
Fig. 2.— Butterfly diagram for a representative solar dy-
a B
namo simulation. ( ) mean radial field h i at the surface
r
r R
( = ) as a function of latitude and time. Blue and red
denote inward and outward polarity respectively and the sat-
b
uration level of the color table is ± 100 G. ( ) Mean toroidal
B r . R
field h i near the base of the convection zone ( = 0 71 ;
φ
kG
blue westward, red eastward, saturation ±30 ). Vertical
lines denote times of 58.57, 58.83, and 64.94 yr represented
in Fig. 3.
the CZ (Fig. 2b) as a function of latitude and time. The
numerical resolution of this simulation is 300 512 1024
× ×
in r, θ, φ (maximum spherical harmonic degree 340) and Fig. 3.— Evolution of the radial magnetic field B at the
r
the computation domain extends from 0.69R–R, with an solar surface. Shown are Molleweide projections at the three
a t
electrically conducting inner boundary and a radial field times indicated by vertical lines in Fig. 2( ), namely =
boundary condition on the outer surface. 58.57, 58.83, and 64.94 yr. Blue and red denote inward (neg-
The half-period of the magnetic cycle is roughly 11-12 ative) and outward (positive) polarity with a saturation level
of ± 100 G to highlight relatively weak fields. The low sat-
yrs, comparable to the solar cycle. As in other advection-
uration level reveals some Gibbs ringing around the spots as
dominated 2D BL/FT models, this period is regulated
a consequence of the spectral method, but this is two orders
largely by the imposed meridional flow and in particu-
of magnitude smaller than the field at spot center (180 kG
s−1
lar the equatorward flow of several m near the base
a c
and 1.5 MG for the fresh spots in and respectively) and
of the CZ (Dikpati & Gilman 2009; Charbonneau 2010).
is quickly dissipated, with no significant contribution to the
Still, to our knowlege this is the first published demon-
flux budget.
stration of a self-sustained, cyclic solar dynamo model
that incorporates a 3D flux emergence algorithm for the This surface flux evolution is similar to the evolution
generation of poloidal field. The dynamo not only in- of magnetic flux as seen in photospheric magnetograms
cludes sunspots (BMRs), but as a BL model, it relies on and as captured by SFT models and it demonstrates that
them for its operation. the BL mechanism does indeed operate in a 3D context
Fig. 3 shows an illustrative example of surface flux evo- as originally envisioned by Babcock (1961) and Leighton
lution. The sequence begins at t = 58.57 yr (a) when a (1964, 1969). The dispersal of tilted sunspot pairs due
new sunspot pair has just emerged in the SH amid rem- to differential rotation, meridional circulation, and tur-
nant flux from previous emergence events. Note also the bulent diffusion generates a mean poloidal field that sus-
slighly older spot pair in the NH at a latitude of about tains the dynamo (see also YM13). Trailing flux from
◦ ◦
45 and longitude near -180 . About three months later bipolar active regions migrates toward the poles from
(b), trailing flux from the southern spot (blue) has begun mid-latitudes in several streams (Fig. 2a) while leading
to disperse and merge with a growing axisymmetric band flux cancels across the equator. Note that this cancel-
◦
of negative flux at a latitude of roughly -65 . Similarly, lation occurs only in a time-integrated sense, since the
trailing flux from the northern spot (red) contributes to a randomness of spot appearances essentially guarantees
◦
positive-polarity band of flux at a latitude of about 67 . that the 3D field distribution at any instant is not sym-
About 6 years later (c), these bands (red in the north metric about the equator.
and blue in the south) have migrated toward higher lati- In many previous dynamo models, the mean toroidal
tudes and have begun to reverse the polar fields (see also field near the base of the CZ is taken as a proxy for the
Fig. 2a). Meanwhile, the next generation of sunspots has sunspot number. In our model this exhibits systematic
already begun to build opposite-polarity bands equator- equatorward propagation at low latitudes similar to the
ward of these. solar butterfly diagram (Fig. 2b). However, in our model

3D BABCOCK-LEIGHTON DYNAMO 5
this proxy is no longer necessary since we incorporate We focused here on the kinematic regime with imposed
sunspots (BMRs) explicitly. Their behavior in Fig. 2a mean flows. Though this provides an instructive starting
does not agree as well with solar observations, showing point, the real promise of this model will be realized when
a tendency to linger at mid-latitudes before a rapid rush we consider nonlinear feedbacks and non-axisymmetric
toward the equator near the end of a cycle. This can flows. By linking in the full ASH machinery to solve
largely be attributed to the masking function in eq. (3) the anelastic equations of motion, we plan to include
which favors mid-latitudes. Since this masking function Lorentz-force feedbacks and enhanced radiative cooling
was originally designed to mimic Joy’s-law tilts that we in the vicinity of active regions. This should produce
capture explicitly, it will be justified to replace it with a torsional oscillations as well as modulation of the merid-
more uniform low-latitude profile that may be calibrated ional circulation and poloidal field generation over the
to more closely match solar observations. course of multiple cycles. We will also consider more
As mentioned in 3, field strengths in this preliminary realistic sunspot distributions and alternative flux emer-
§
model are artificially high due to the prodigious flux as- gence algorithms such as that proposed by YM13. On
signed to BMRs. Typical polar field strengths are 100 a longer time scale, we will include resolved convective
G, about an order of magnitude larger that solar values. motions and investigate their role in the generation and
However, the relative strengths are in reasonable agree- transport of magnetic flux.
ment with solar observations in that most of the magnetic The model presented here is the first step toward a
energy (ME) is in the mean toroidal field, which exceeds series of progressivelymore sophisticated and realistic 3D
the ME in the non-axisymmteric field by a factor of 30- solar dynamo models that will allow us to study not only
40 and the ME in the mean poloidal field by a factor of the physics of the dynamo itself, but also the response of
3000-4000. the corona and heliosphere to cyclic dynamo-generated
In summary, the main result of this letter is the con- fields.
struction of a viable 3D BL/FT solar dynamo model
using a novel Spotmaker algorithm for flux emergence.
We thank Kyle Augustson and Matthias Rempel
Spotmaker is a 3D generalization of the double-ring al-
for constructrive comments on the manuscript. This
gorithm previously used in 2D BL/FT models and pro-
work is supported by NASA grants NNX08AI57G and
vides a mechanism for unifying BL/FT dynamo mod-
NNX08AQ34G. The National Center for Atmospheric
els with SFT models, building on the sucesses of each.
Research is sponsored by the National Science Founda-
tion.
REFERENCES
Babcock, H. W. 1961, ApJ, 133, 572 Leighton, R. B. 1964, ApJ, 140, 1547
Baumann, I., Schmitt, D., & Schu¨ssler, M. 2006, A&A, 446, 307 —. 1969, ApJ, 156, 1
Brun, A. S. 2010, EAS Pub. Ser., 44, 81 Miesch, M. S. 2005, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 2,
Brun, A. S., Miesch, M. S., & Toomre, J. 2004, ApJ, 614, 1073 http://www.livingreviews.org/lrsp-2005-1
Charbonneau, P. 2010, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 7, Munoz-Jaramillo, A., Nandy, D., P.C.H.Martens, & Yeates, A. R.
http://www.livingreviews.org/lrsp-2010-3 2010, ApJ, 720, L20
Choudhuri, A. R., Schu¨ssler, M., & Dikpati, M. 1995, Astron. Nandy, D. & Choudhuri, A. R. 2001, ApJ, 551, 576
Astrophys., 303, L29 Parfrey, K. P. & Menou, K. 2007, ApJ, 667, L207
Clune, T. C., Elliott, J. R., Miesch, M. S., Toomre, J., & Rempel, M. 2006, ApJ, 647, 662
Glatzmaier, G. A. 1999, Parallel Computing, 25, 361 Schrijver, C. J. 2001, ApJ, 547, 475
Dikpati, M. 2011, ApJ, 733, 90 (7 pp) Schu¨ssler, M. & Rempel, M. 2005, A&A, 441, 337
Dikpati, M. & Charbonneau, P. 1999, ApJ, 518, 508 Stenflo, J. O. & Kosovichev, A. G. 2012, ApJ, 745, 129 (12pp)
Dikpati, M., de Toma, G., Gilman, P. A., Arge, C. N., & White, Wang, Y. M. & Sheeley, N. R. 1991, ApJ, 375, 761
O. R. 2004, ApJ, 601, 1136 Yeates, A. R. & Munoz-Jaramillo, A. 2013, MNRAS, 436, 3366
Dikpati, M. & Gilman, P. A. 2007, Solar Phys., 241, 1
—. 2009, Space Sci. Rev., 144, 67
Durney, B. R. 1997, ApJ, 486, 1065
Guerrero, G., Rheinhardt, M., Brandenburg, A., & Dikpati, M.
2012, MNRAS, 420, L1