 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12- Month PhD Report   
December 2021  
 
WILBR
 
 
Responsible  Partner:  Animal  and  Plant 
Health Agency, UK 
 
 
1 
 

 
Important Notes 
 
•  The full 9M report will be included in the Summary Progress Report due in 
September of each year.  
 
•  The full 12M report will be included in a new WP6 deliverable due in March of 
2021/2022.  
 
•  A ‘Summary’ of each PhD project will be compiled from these 12M reports, and 
included in the Periodic report in February of each year.  
 
o  The summary will be compiled from the content of the following sections :  
▪  Summary (approx. 500 words) 
▪  Overview of PhD progress 
▪  Deliverables and Milestones  
 
 
   
 
This document is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. This Programme has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830 
 
 

 
1.  Summary  
•  For the 9-month report, summarise the key activities, results and achievements for the reporting period of 
January to September each year.  
•  For the 12-month report, summarise the key activities, results and achievements for the reporting period 
of January to December each year.  
A literature review has been written on the role of wild birds in dissemination and persistence of antimicrobial 
resistance (AMR) in the farm environment. The review includes sections on identifying the current situation 
regarding AMR in different environments; drivers for AMR; the role of vectors and the environment in 
persistence  and  dissemination  of  AMR;  the  role  of  AMR  surveillance;  and  evaluation  of  different 
methodologies for identifying AMR, both by phenotype and genotype, in bacteria. 
 
Pig and presumptive gull faecal samples were collected over three time points in October 2017, 2018, and 2019 
from a low antimicrobial usage pig farm as part of the APHA’s work on the ARDIG project within the One 
Health European Joint Programme (https://onehealthejp.eu/jrp-ardig/). These were grown on antibiotic free 
and antibiotic selective agar, and 632  E. coli were purified from pig and gull faeces (n=342 and n=290 
respectively) (see Annex 2, Table 1). 176 gull isolates (110 from T3, 66 from T5) that had not been subject to 
previous analyses were identified and underwent whole genome sequencing. WGS data for all isolates was run 
through APHA Seqfinder pipeline and Abricate to identify AMR determinants and plasmids. Seven allele 
MLST was carried out using SRST2 to identify the E. coli Sequence Type (ST) of isolates, which was used as 
an indicator of E. coli diversity in pig and gull populations. A total of 91 different sequence types were 
identified from the isolates included in this study, with 63 and 57 STs identified in gull and pig isolates, 
respectively. Considering the SNP differences is the next step to understand if the same “clone” or strain has 
been transferred rather than an AMR plasmid A core genome SNP alignment was generated from WGS data 
of all isolates using Snippy version 4.6.0 to compare the core genes that are present in all members of the same 
species, and a SNP distance matrix was generated using snp-dists version 0.7.0 to estimate the SNP differences 
between isolates to determine the levels of genetic variation in the ST744s, allowing any transmission and 
persistence of clones across host species and time points, on this farm, to be identified. Preliminary analysis 
allowed AMR profiles to be linked to ST types that are circulating in both wild bird and pig populations. 
 
Another outdoor pig farm, known to have wild birds persistently present on farm, had been recruited for a 
longitudinal study and was visited in September 2021 where over 150 environmental swabs were collected. An 
opportunity to examine the dissemination of AMR in wild bird populations across Great Britain for a 12 month 
period through the APHA’s wild bird scanning surveillance programme is currently being pursued.  
 
A poster was submitted to the OHEJP ASM 2021 meeting, and an oral presentation on the PhD was presented 
virtually in the 3MT competition for the OHEJP ASM 2021, as part of communicating their research. The 
student won the prize for the best poster presentation at the OHEJP ASM 2021. The student has also attended 
two virtual plasmid workshops hosted by International Society for Plasmid Biology and Other Mobile Genetic 
Elements in order to further develop their skill set for tasks later on in the project. 
 
2.  Overview of the PhD project progress  
•  In both reports, please provide an update or key information with respect to any progress for all tasks in 
all work packages. If there has been no progress made, please explain the reasons why e.g. this task is not 
due to take place until July 2021.    
Due to the Covid-19 pandemic in UK only desk and lab-based tasks have been recommended; currently farm 
visits are not permitted for research projects. A literature review has been completed on the role of wild birds 
in dissemination and persistence of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in the farm environment. The review 
includes sections on identifying the current situation regarding AMR in different environments; drivers for 
AMR; the role of vectors and the environment in persistence and dissemination of AMR; the role of AMR 
surveillance; and evaluation of different methodologies for identifying AMR, both by phenotype and 
genotype, in bacteria. 
 
This document is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. This Programme has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830 
 
 

 
 
Over two hundred archived E. coli isolates from gull faeces that had not been subject to previous analysis 
have undergone whole genome sequencing, and downstream bioinformatics is now currently taking place. 
These isolates were collected as part of the OH-EJP ARDIG project. Work is still being undertaken so results 
are not complete. 
 
A farm visit was carried out over 150 environmental swabs were collected. The student has used antibiotic free 
and antibiotic containing plates to isolate over 1500 isolates from these samples. The student is currently using 
biochemical tests and MALDI-ToF to determine the species of isolates in order to select a subset for sequencing. 
 
An opportunity to examine the dissemination of AMR in wild bird populations across Great Britain for a 6 
month period through the APHA’s wild bird scanning surveillance programme is currently being pursued. It 
has been agreed that the wild bird scanning surveillance will provide 0.5-1.0g of caecal/faecal contents from 
every wild bird submitted as part of the APHA’s wild bird scanning surveillance for a 6 month period. This 
study would allow a unique opportunity to establish the burden of AMR in the wild bird population of Great 
Britain. The study will provide context to our on farm studies by allowing wider comparisons to be made, 
highlighting any correlation between the AMR profiles identified in the farm environment and those found in 
wild birds across Great Britain.  
 
3.  Progress of the research performed in the PhD project and key scientific results  
•  For the 9-month report please describe the key scientific results for the reporting period of January to 
September each year.  
•  For the 12-month report, please describe the key scientific results for the reporting period of January to 
December each year. 
•  Include a description of the project activities per task , plus detailed changes and any deviations 
compared to the annual work plan to which this 9 or 12 month report applies and the reason(s) for these 
differences.  
•  PI’s may be requested to update the initial Annual Work Plans if the deviations reported are considered 
very significant. 
•  Please provide enough detail to enable the research to be understood, without the need for additional 
information. Wherever possible, link this to a specific task in the original PhD work plan describing the 
WP#, Task# and Task Name.  
Deliverable 3 (9 month report) in AWP for Y4 has been completed and deliverable 4 (12 month report) is 
being undertaken.  
 
Milestone 1 in AWP was delayed as due to further Covid-19 restrictions in the UK, all fieldwork at APHA 
had been stopped. An outdoor pig farm was visited in September 2021 and over 150 environmental swabs 
were collected, which resulted in the isolation of over 1500 bacterial isolates. Only one farm visit has been 
able to be carried out so far due to Covid-19 delays. Milestones 2 and 3 are delayed as a result of the initial 
delay of milestone 1. 
 
Some historical E. coli isolated from gull faeces, collected from an outdoor pig farm, during a longitudinal 
study in the OH-EJP project ARDIG are being included in this PhD project as a result of the delays caused by 
COVID-19. Over two hundred isolates archived from this farm have undergone whole genome sequencing, 
and downstream bioinformatic analysis is now being carried out in line with Milestone 2. This will result in a 
dataset including over 300 gull isolates and over 400 pig isolates from three time points that can be compared. 
AMR profiles and phylogeny are being generated from whole genome sequencing data to assess the diversity 
 
This document is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. This Programme has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830 
 
 

 
of E. coli strains and associated ARGs in gulls and pigs on the same farm, and assess the potential for 
transmission of AMR bacteria between wild birds and livestock. This work is still being carried out so the 
results are not yet complete. 
 
An opportunity to examine the dissemination of AMR in wild bird populations across Great Britain for a 6 
month period through the APHA’s wild bird scanning surveillance programme is also being pursued. The wild 
bird scanning surveillance programme examines wild bird species for all disease and mortality investigations, 
including infectious and non-infectious disease. They receive submissions from all over Great Britain, and 
from many different species. It has been agreed that the wild bird scanning surveillance will provide 0.5-1.0g 
of  caecal/intestinal  contents  from  every  wild  bird  submitted  as  part  of  the  APHA’s  wild  bird  scanning 
surveillance for a 6 month period. Final logistics are being confirmed, taking in to account the risk from human 
and livestock pathogens that wild birds could be carrying.  
 
4.  Progress of the research project: milestones and deliverables 
Deliverables 
 
PhD  Deliverable  Deliverable name  Delivery  Actual  If not  Comments 
Project  number  date  Delivery  achieved: 
Reference  from  Date  Forecast 
Annual  achievement 
Work  date 
Plan 
D-PhD10- Completion of 9   
WILBR  M45     
1.3  month review 
D-PhD10- Completion of 12   
WILBR  M48     
1.4  month review 
 
           
 
   
 
This document is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. This Programme has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830 
 
 

| PhD         | None   | None   | Deliverable   | Deliverable name   |     | Delivery   |    | Actual     | If not        | Comments   |
| Project     |        |        | number        |                    |     |            |    | Delivery   | achieved:     |            |
| Reference   |        |        |               |                    |     |            |    | Date       | Forecast      |            |
|             |        |        |               |                    |     |            |    |            | achievement   |            |
|             |        |        |               |                    |     |            |    |            | date          |            |
|:------------|:-------|:-------|:--------------|:-------------------|:----|:-----------|:---|:-----------|:--------------|:-----------|
|             |        |        |               |                    |     | date       |    |            |               |            |
|             |        |        |               |                    |     | from       |    |            |               |            |
|             |        |        |               |                    |     | Annual     |    |            |               |            |
|             |        |        |               |                    |     | Work       |    |            |               |            |
|             |        |        |               |                    |     | Plan       |    |            |               |            |
| WILBR       |        |        | D-PhD10-      | Completion of 9    | M45 |            |    |            |               |            |
|             |        |        | 1.3           | month review       |     |            |    |            |               |            |
| WILBR       |        |        | D-PhD10-      | Completion of 12   | M48 |            |    |            |               |            |
|             |        |        | 1.4           | month review       |     |            |    |            |               |            |

| PhD       |
|:----------|
| Project   |
| Reference |

| Deliverable   |
|:--------------|
| number        |

| Actual   |
|:---------|
| Delivery |
| Date     |

| If not      |
|:------------|
| achieved:   |
| Forecast    |
| achievement |
| date        |

 
Milestones 
 
PhD  Milestone  Milestone name  Delivery  Achiev If not  Comments 
Project  number  date from  ed  achiev
Reference  Annual  ed: 
(Yes / 
Work Plan  Foreca
No) 
st 
achiev
ement 
date 
Collection of  M48   
microbiological 
WILBR  1     
samples for 
longitudinal study 
Molecular analysis of  M48   
bacterial isolates and 
WILBR  2     
antimicrobial 
resistance 
Characterisation of  M48   
mobile elements 
WILBR  3     
transmitting/proliferat
ing AMR 
Completion of 9  M45   
WILBR  4     
month review 
Completion of 12  M48   
WILBR  5     
month review 
 
5.  Soft skills and Continuing Professional Development training 
Please describe details of relevant soft skills or CPD training attended and undertaken by the PhD student.  
 
Name of Training Event  Topic  Dates (DD/MM/YY)  Organising Institute 
EURL-AR Training Course  Working with bacterial  26-29/04/2021  Technical University of 
sequence data in relation to  Denmark 
the monitoring and 
reporting of antimicrobial 
resistance in zoonotic and 
commensal bacteria 
 
6.  Publications and additional outputs 
No publications or patents. 
 
7.  Remarkable outcomes  
Please include ‘Remarkable outcomes’  i.e. deliverable, publication, folder, tool, etc. that are appropriate for 
communication purposes. You have the possibility to draw the attention to remarkable achievements that 
could be highlighted by the OHEJP communications team to illustrate the potential impact of your project. 
 
The student won the prize for the best poster presentation at the OHEJP ASM 2021. 
 
8.  Impact & relevance  
250 words - Describe how the PhD project contributes to and enhances the collaborative relationships 
between the partner institutes involved (both internal and external to the existing consortium).  
 
This document is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. This Programme has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830 
 
 

| PhD         |   Milestone | Milestone name          | Delivery    | Achiev   |    | If not   |    | Comments   |
| Project     |      number |                         | date from   | ed       |    |          |    |            |
| Reference   |             |                         | Annual      | (Yes /   |    |          |    |            |
|             |             |                         | Work Plan   | No)      |    |          |    |            |
|:------------|------------:|:------------------------|:------------|:---------|:---|:---------|:---|:-----------|
|             |             |                         |             |          |    | achiev   |    |            |
|             |             |                         |             |          |    | ed:      |    |            |
|             |             |                         |             |          |    | Foreca   |    |            |
|             |             |                         |             |          |    | st       |    |            |
|             |             |                         |             |          |    | achiev   |    |            |
|             |             |                         |             |          |    | ement    |    |            |
|             |             |                         |             |          |    | date     |    |            |
| WILBR       |           1 | Collection of           | M48         |          |    |          |    |            |
|             |             | microbiological         |             |          |    |          |    |            |
|             |             | samples for             |             |          |    |          |    |            |
|             |             | longitudinal study      |             |          |    |          |    |            |
| WILBR       |           2 | Molecular analysis of   | M48         |          |    |          |    |            |
|             |             | bacterial isolates and  |             |          |    |          |    |            |
|             |             | antimicrobial           |             |          |    |          |    |            |
|             |             | resistance              |             |          |    |          |    |            |
| WILBR       |           3 | Characterisation of     | M48         |          |    |          |    |            |
|             |             | mobile elements         |             |          |    |          |    |            |
|             |             | transmitting/proliferat |             |          |    |          |    |            |
|             |             | ing AMR                 |             |          |    |          |    |            |
| WILBR       |           4 | Completion of 9         | M45         |          |    |          |    |            |
|             |             | month review            |             |          |    |          |    |            |
| WILBR       |           5 | Completion of 12        | M48         |          |    |          |    |            |
|             |             | month review            |             |          |    |          |    |            |

| PhD       |
|:----------|
| Project   |
| Reference |

| Milestone   |
|:------------|
| number      |

| Delivery   |
|:-----------|
| date from  |
| Annual     |
| Work Plan  |

| Achiev   |
|:---------|
| ed       |
| (Yes /   |
| No)      |

|                         | Name of Training Event   |    |                              | Topic   |    |               | Dates (DD/MM/YY)   |    |                         | Organising Institute   |    |
|:------------------------|:-------------------------|:---|:-----------------------------|:--------|:---|:--------------|:-------------------|:---|:------------------------|:-----------------------|:---|
| EURL-AR Training Course |                          |    | Working with bacterial       |         |    | 26-29/04/2021 |                    |    | Technical University of |                        |    |
|                         |                          |    | sequence data in relation to |         |    |               |                    |    | Denmark                 |                        |    |
|                         |                          |    | the monitoring and           |         |    |               |                    |    |                         |                        |    |
|                         |                          |    | reporting of antimicrobial   |         |    |               |                    |    |                         |                        |    |
|                         |                          |    | resistance in zoonotic and   |         |    |               |                    |    |                         |                        |    |
|                         |                          |    | commensal bacteria           |         |    |               |                    |    |                         |                        |    |

 
The supervisory team brings together leading experts in veterinary, wildlife and environmental AMR, with 
expertise spanning veterinary and molecular microbiology, bioinformatics, microbial ecology and evolution, 
as well as wildlife disease. 
 
William Gaze is working with the United Nations Environment Project on AMR in the environment, having 
recently authored the UNEP Frontiers report on AMR and the environment. He is currently located within 
two interdisciplinary units, Exeter’s Centre for Environment and Human health, and the Environmental and 
Sustainability Institute, which is also part of the University of Exeter 
 
Beside his work as a researcher within SVA, Stefan Börjesson is involved in the Swedish AMR monitoring 
program and is also a senior lecturer in clinical microbiology with an emphasis on AMR in a One-health 
perspective at Linköping University at the Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine.  
 
Muna Anjum leads the Bacterial Characterisation Workgroup and is the AMR Research Lead at the APHA 
working at the interface of molecular and veterinary microbiology, within the One Health remit. As lead for 
the AMR research, she is also involved in supporting national AMR surveillance activities and APHA’s 
response to national outbreaks, and identifying new and emerging threats. She is a member of the DEFRA 
Antimicrobial Resistance Coordination Group, which advises and reviews the DEFRA activities on 
antimicrobial usage in animals and AMR in microorganisms from feedstuffs, animals and food, the APHA 
lead for the Defra AMR in the Environment group, and works closely with colleagues in Public Health 
England in various research projects and national activities. 
 
9.  Follow-up of the recommendations and comments in previous review(s) by the 
Ethics Advisors 
The responses to previous ethical reviewers’ comments have been accepted and this is closed. 
10. Impact of COVID-19 crisis on the project 
Please indicate the (sub)tasks and associated milestones and deliverables that are affected by the CoViD-19 
crisis, propose new deadlines and indicate the reason: for instance issues in provision of equipment, materials or 
samples, shortage of staff (reallocated or sick), shortage of resources (reallocation of budget, etc.), or other. 
Also estimate the associated budget that will not be spent, or with delay.  
If not a milestone of deliverable, don’t forget costs associated with the organisation of meetings! 
You can give more details in the ‘Comments’ field below the table. 
 
Tasks or Subtasks  Milestones and Deliverables  Associated budget 
End date  Expected   Associated  Deadline 
Name of  New  Budget that  Budget that 
according  end date  Milestone  according  Reason for 
Task or  proposed  will not be  will be spent 
to AWP  due to  or  to AWP  delay 
Subtask  deadline  spent  with delay 
2020  crisis  Deliverable  2020 
      Milestone 2   M48  M54   COVID-19   not yet known  not yet known 
      Milestone 3  M48  M57  COVID-19  Not yet known  Not yet known 
      Milestone 4  M48  M60  COVID-19  Not yet known  Not yet known 
Comments: 
The project has been significantly affected by COVID-19 as the student by this point should have visitied the 
farm recruited for longitudinal sampling four times. The original plan was to sample across four time points in 
one year, but that has not happened as a result of COVID-19. To help mitigate risks posed by  Covid-19 on 
visiting and sampling on farms, we have already included characterization of archived isolates and are also 
planning to explore bird caecal samples collected from national surveillance of wild birds. 
 
This document is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. This Programme has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830 
 
 

|         | Tasks or Subtasks   | None   | None      | None   | None   | None     |    |             | Milestones and Deliverables   | None   | None   | None      | None   | None     | None       |    |               | Associated budget   | None          |    |
|:--------|:--------------------|:-------|:----------|:-------|:-------|:---------|:---|:------------|:------------------------------|:-------|:-------|:----------|:-------|:---------|:-----------|:---|:--------------|:--------------------|:--------------|:---|
| Name of |                     |        | End date  |        |        | Expected |    |             | Associated                    |        |        | Deadline  |        | New      | Reason for |    | Budget that   |                     | Budget that   |    |
| Task or |                     |        |           |        |        |          |    |             |                               |        |        |           |        | proposed | delay      |    | will not be   |                     | will be spent |    |
| Subtask |                     |        |           |        |        |          |    |             |                               |        |        |           |        | deadline |            |    | spent         |                     | with delay    |    |
|         |                     |        | according |        |        | end date |    |             | Milestone                     |        |        | according |        |          |            |    |               |                     |               |    |
|         |                     |        | to AWP    |        |        | due to   |    |             | or                            |        |        | to AWP    |        |          |            |    |               |                     |               |    |
|         |                     |        | 2020      |        |        | crisis   |    |             | Deliverable                   |        |        | 2020      |        |          |            |    |               |                     |               |    |
|         |                     |        |           |        |        |          |    | Milestone 2 |                               |        | M48    |           |        | M54      | COVID-19   |    | not yet known |                     | not yet known |    |
|         |                     |        |           |        |        |          |    | Milestone 3 |                               |        | M48    |           |        | M57      | COVID-19   |    | Not yet known |                     | Not yet known |    |
|         |                     |        |           |        |        |          |    | Milestone 4 |                               |        | M48    |           |        | M60      | COVID-19   |    | Not yet known |                     | Not yet known |    |

| Name of   |
|:----------|
| Task or   |
| Subtask   |

| New      |
|:---------|
| proposed |
| deadline |

| Budget that   |
|:--------------|
| will not be   |
| spent         |

| Budget that   |
|:--------------|
| will be spent |
| with delay    |

| Reason for   |
|:-------------|
| delay        |

 
11. List of critical risks 
Please indicate possible risk within your PhD project 
Description of risk  Yes/No 
Loss of PhD supervisor(s)   No 
No 
Loss of technical training staff delaying progress of the work 
Yes 
Delay in work plan execution 
Conflicts between the collaborative partners that support the PhD  No 
No 
Lack of commitment between the collaborative partners that support the PhD 
No 
Delay in duties, tasks or reporting  
No 
Poor working relationships within the PhD project team 
No 
Change in PhD student circumstances requiring temporary leave 
None 
Other risks (please describe) 
Additional information:  
 
12. Interactions with on-going JRPs/JIPs or with external (EU or national) relevant 
projects or initiatives such as national action plans (AMR, Zoonoses etc.), OHEJP 
stakeholders, national and international surveillance programmes. 
Please describe any link (workshops, meetings etc.) with a Joint Research Project or Joint Integrative Project; 
with any external (EU, national and international) relevant project (name + website), and any OHEJP 
stakeholders.  
This PhD overlaps with the ARDIG project, where wild birds on farm have already been sampled. 
 
13. List of dissemination and communication activities 
Please fill in one table per event you attended/organised or for any publications which have no DOI reference 
(e.g. article in journal, publication in conference proceedings or workshop, book or monograph, chapter in a 
book, thesis/Dissertation, other). 
Name of the activity:  ISPB Plasmids Around the Globe 
Date:  06/05/2021 
Place:  Online 
Specify the Dissemination and Communication activities linked to the One Health EJP project for each of the 
   
follYoews i/n Ngo c ategories  Yes / No 
Organisation of a Conference    Participation to a Conference   
Organisation of a Workshop    Participation to a Workshop  Yes 
Press release    Participation to an Event other than a   
Non-scientific and non-peer-reviewed publication    CVoidnefoe/reFnilcme  or a Workshop   
(Epxohpibuiltaiorins ed publication)    Brokerage Event   
Flyer    Pitch Event   
Training    Trade Fair   
Social Media    Participation in activities organized jointly   
Website    wOtithhe ro ther H2020 projects   
Communication Campaign (e.g. Radio, TV)        
Specify the estimated number of persons reached, in the context of this dissemination and communication 
   
activity), in each of the following categoriesS  Number  Number 
Scientific Community (Higher Education,  60  Media    
RInedsuesatrrcyh )     Investors    
 
This document is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. This Programme has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830 
 
 

| Description of risk                                                        |    |      | Yes/No   |    |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---|:-----|:---------|:---|
| Loss of PhD supervisor(s)                                                  |    | No   |          |    |
| Loss of technical training staff delaying progress of the work             |    | No   |          |    |
| Delay in work plan execution                                               |    | Yes  |          |    |
| Conflicts between the collaborative partners that support the PhD          |    | No   |          |    |
| Lack of commitment between the collaborative partners that support the PhD |    | No   |          |    |
| Delay in duties, tasks or reporting                                        |    | No   |          |    |
| Poor working relationships within the PhD project team                     |    | No   |          |    |
| Change in PhD student circumstances requiring temporary leave              |    | No   |          |    |
| Other risks (please describe)                                              |    | None |          |    |

| Name of the activity:                                                                                       |    | ISPB Plasmids Around the Globe   | None               | None   | None    | None                                          | None   | None   | None     | None   |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---|:---------------------------------|:-------------------|:-------|:--------|:----------------------------------------------|:-------|:-------|:---------|:-------|
| Date:                                                                                                       |    | 06/05/2021                       |                    |        |         |                                               |        |        |          |        |
| Place:                                                                                                      |    | Online                           |                    |        |         |                                               |        |        |          |        |
| Specify the Dissemination and Communication activities linked to the One Health EJP project for each of the |    |                                  |                    |        |         |                                               |        |        |          |        |
| fo                                                                                                          |    | l                                | lYoews i/n Ngo c a | t      | egories |                                               |        |        | Yes / No |        |
| Organisation of a Conference                                                                                |    |                                  |                    |        |         | Participation to a Conference                 |        |        |          |        |
| Organisation of a Workshop                                                                                  |    |                                  |                    |        |         | Participation to a Workshop                   |        | Yes    |          |        |
| Press release                                                                                               |    |                                  |                    |        |         | Participation to an Event other than a        |        |        |          |        |
| Non-scientific and non-peer-reviewed publication                                                            |    |                                  |                    |        |         | CVoidnefoe/reFnilcme or a Workshop            |        |        |          |        |
| (Epxohpibuiltaiorins ed publication)                                                                        |    |                                  |                    |        |         | Brokerage Event                               |        |        |          |        |
| Flyer                                                                                                       |    |                                  |                    |        |         | Pitch Event                                   |        |        |          |        |
| Training                                                                                                    |    |                                  |                    |        |         | Trade Fair                                    |        |        |          |        |
| Social Media                                                                                                |    |                                  |                    |        |         | Participation in activities organized jointly |        |        |          |        |
| Website                                                                                                     |    |                                  |                    |        |         | wOtithhe ro ther H2020 projects               |        |        |          |        |
| Communication Campaign (e.g. Radio, TV)                                                                     |    |                                  |                    |        |         |                                               |        |        |          |        |
| Specify the estimated number of persons reached, in the context of this dissemination and communication     |    |                                  |                    |        |         |                                               |        |        |          |        |
| activity), in each of the following categoriesS                                                             |    |                                  | Number             |        |         |                                               |        |        | Number   |        |
| Scientific Community (Higher Education,                                                                     |    | 60                               |                    |        |         | Media                                         |        |        |          |        |
| RInedsuesatrrcyh )                                                                                          |    |                                  |                    |        |         | Investors                                     |        |        |          |        |

 
Civil Society     Customers    
General Public     Other    
 
Policy Makers       
 
 
Name of the activity:  ISPB Plasmids Around the Globe 
Date:  25/05/2021 
Place:  Online 
Specify the Dissemination and Communication activities linked to the One Health EJP project for each of the 
following categories 
   
Yes / No  Yes / No 
Organisation of a Conference    Participation to a Conference   
Organisation of a Workshop    Participation to a Workshop  Yes 
Press release    Participation to an Event other than a   
Conference or a Workshop 
Non-scientific and non-peer-reviewed publication    Video/Film   
(popularised publication) 
Exhibition    Brokerage Event   
Flyer    Pitch Event   
Training    Trade Fair   
Social Media    Participation in activities organized jointly   
with other H2020 projects 
Website    Other   
Communication Campaign (e.g. Radio, TV)      
 
Specify the estimated number of persons reached, in the context of this dissemination and communication 
activity), in each of the following categories 
   
Number  Number 
Scientific Community (Higher Education,  60  Media    
Research) 
Industry     Investors    
Civil Society     Customers    
General Public     Other    
 
Policy Makers       
 
 
 
This document is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. This Programme has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830 
 
 

|    | Civil Society   |    |    |    | Customers   |    |    |
|:---|:----------------|:---|:---|:---|:------------|:---|:---|
|    | General Public  |    |    |    | Other       |    |    |
|    | Policy Makers   |    |    |    |             |    |    |

|               | Name of the activity:                                                                                       |    | ISPB Plasmids Around the Globe   | None     | None   | None       | None                                          | None   | None   | None     | None   |
|:--------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---|:---------------------------------|:---------|:-------|:-----------|:----------------------------------------------|:-------|:-------|:---------|:-------|
|               | Date:                                                                                                       |    | 25/05/2021                       |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Place:                                                                                                      |    | Online                           |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Specify the Dissemination and Communication activities linked to the One Health EJP project for each of the |    |                                  |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | following categories                                                                                        |    |                                  |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                                             |    |                                  | Yes / No |        |            |                                               |        |        | Yes / No |        |
|               | Organisation of a Conference                                                                                |    |                                  |          |        |            | Participation to a Conference                 |        |        |          |        |
|               | Organisation of a Workshop                                                                                  |    |                                  |          |        |            | Participation to a Workshop                   |        | Yes    |          |        |
| Press release | Press release                                                                                               |    |                                  |          |        |            | Participation to an Event other than a        |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                                             |    |                                  |          |        |            | Conference or a Workshop                      |        |        |          |        |
|               | Non-scientific and non-peer-reviewed publication                                                            |    |                                  |          |        | Video/Film | Video/Film                                    |        |        |          |        |
|               | (popularised publication)                                                                                   |    |                                  |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Exhibition                                                                                                  |    |                                  |          |        |            | Brokerage Event                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Flyer                                                                                                       |    |                                  |          |        |            | Pitch Event                                   |        |        |          |        |
|               | Training                                                                                                    |    |                                  |          |        |            | Trade Fair                                    |        |        |          |        |
| Social Media  | Social Media                                                                                                |    |                                  |          |        |            | Participation in activities organized jointly |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                                             |    |                                  |          |        |            | with other H2020 projects                     |        |        |          |        |
|               | Website                                                                                                     |    |                                  |          |        |            | Other                                         |        |        |          |        |
|               | Communication Campaign (e.g. Radio, TV)                                                                     |    |                                  |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Specify the estimated number of persons reached, in the context of this dissemination and communication     |    |                                  |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | activity), in each of the following categories                                                              |    |                                  |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                                             |    |                                  | Number   |        |            |                                               |        |        | Number   |        |
|               | Scientific Community (Higher Education,                                                                     |    | 60                               |          |        | Media      |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Research)                                                                                                   |    |                                  |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Industry                                                                                                    |    |                                  |          |        |            | Investors                                     |        |        |          |        |
|               | Civil Society                                                                                               |    |                                  |          |        |            | Customers                                     |        |        |          |        |
|               | General Public                                                                                              |    |                                  |          |        |            | Other                                         |        |        |          |        |
|               | Policy Makers                                                                                               |    |                                  |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |

 
Name of the activity:  OHEJP ASM 2021 (poster and 3MT competition) 
Date:  09-11/06/2021 
Place:  Online 
Specify the Dissemination and Communication activities linked to the One Health EJP project for each of the 
following categories 
   
Yes / No  Yes / No 
Organisation of a Conference    Participation to a Conference  Yes 
Organisation of a Workshop    Participation to a Workshop   
Press release    Participation to an Event other than a   
Conference or a Workshop 
Non-scientific and non-peer-reviewed publication    Video/Film   
(popularised publication) 
Exhibition    Brokerage Event   
Flyer    Pitch Event  Yes 
Training    Trade Fair   
Social Media    Participation in activities organized jointly   
with other H2020 projects 
Website    Other   
Communication Campaign (e.g. Radio, TV)      
 
Specify the estimated number of persons reached, in the context of this dissemination and communication 
activity), in each of the following categories 
   
Number  Number 
Scientific Community (Higher Education,  550+  Media    
Research) 
Industry     Investors    
Civil Society     Customers    
General Public     Other    
 
Policy Makers       
 
 
This document is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. This Programme has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830 
 
 

|               | Name of the activity:                                                                                       |    | OHEJP ASM 2021 (poster and 3MT competition)   | None     | None   | None       | None                                          | None   | None   | None     | None   |
|:--------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---|:----------------------------------------------|:---------|:-------|:-----------|:----------------------------------------------|:-------|:-------|:---------|:-------|
|               | Date:                                                                                                       |    | 09-11/06/2021                                 |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Place:                                                                                                      |    | Online                                        |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Specify the Dissemination and Communication activities linked to the One Health EJP project for each of the |    |                                               |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | following categories                                                                                        |    |                                               |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                                             |    |                                               | Yes / No |        |            |                                               |        |        | Yes / No |        |
|               | Organisation of a Conference                                                                                |    |                                               |          |        |            | Participation to a Conference                 |        | Yes    |          |        |
|               | Organisation of a Workshop                                                                                  |    |                                               |          |        |            | Participation to a Workshop                   |        |        |          |        |
| Press release | Press release                                                                                               |    |                                               |          |        |            | Participation to an Event other than a        |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                                             |    |                                               |          |        |            | Conference or a Workshop                      |        |        |          |        |
|               | Non-scientific and non-peer-reviewed publication                                                            |    |                                               |          |        | Video/Film | Video/Film                                    |        |        |          |        |
|               | (popularised publication)                                                                                   |    |                                               |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Exhibition                                                                                                  |    |                                               |          |        |            | Brokerage Event                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Flyer                                                                                                       |    |                                               |          |        |            | Pitch Event                                   |        | Yes    |          |        |
|               | Training                                                                                                    |    |                                               |          |        |            | Trade Fair                                    |        |        |          |        |
| Social Media  | Social Media                                                                                                |    |                                               |          |        |            | Participation in activities organized jointly |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                                             |    |                                               |          |        |            | with other H2020 projects                     |        |        |          |        |
|               | Website                                                                                                     |    |                                               |          |        |            | Other                                         |        |        |          |        |
|               | Communication Campaign (e.g. Radio, TV)                                                                     |    |                                               |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Specify the estimated number of persons reached, in the context of this dissemination and communication     |    |                                               |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | activity), in each of the following categories                                                              |    |                                               |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               |                                                                                                             |    |                                               | Number   |        |            |                                               |        |        | Number   |        |
|               | Scientific Community (Higher Education,                                                                     |    | 550+                                          |          |        | Media      |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Research)                                                                                                   |    |                                               |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |
|               | Industry                                                                                                    |    |                                               |          |        |            | Investors                                     |        |        |          |        |
|               | Civil Society                                                                                               |    |                                               |          |        |            | Customers                                     |        |        |          |        |
|               | General Public                                                                                              |    |                                               |          |        |            | Other                                         |        |        |          |        |
|               | Policy Makers                                                                                               |    |                                               |          |        |            |                                               |        |        |          |        |