 
 
 
ACADEMIC 
SERACH 
ENGINE
 
      
 
Submitted  to:  Mr.  Rupak  sir 
submitted By: Piyush 
 
      
      

 
Academic Search Enqine 
 
Academic  Search  Engines  presents  a  summary  view  of  the  new 
challenges that the Web set to the scientific activity through the most 
novel and innovative searching services available on the Web. This is 
the first approach to analyse search engines exclusively addressed to 
the research community in an integrative handbook. 
Popular  Academic  Search  Engines:  We  will  be  evaluating  and 
comparing  the  three  basic  and  widely  used  search  engines  used  for 
academic purposes. 
These are: 
1. Google Scholar. 
2. Base (Bielefeld Academic Search Engine) 
3. Scirus  
 
 
Google Scholar 
 
Google Scholar provides a simple way to broadly search for scholarly 
literature. From one place, cross search is possible in many disciplines 
and sources: peer-reviewed papers, theses, books, abstracts and articles 
from academic publishers, professional societies, preprint repositories, 
universities and other scholarly organizations. It helps in identifying the 
most relevant research across the world of scholarly research. GS works 
with publishers of scholarly information to index peer-reviewed papers, 
theses, preprints, abstracts and technical reports from all disciplines of 
research and make them searchable on Google and Google Scholar. 
Ranking of articles is done according to: weighing the full text of each 
article, the author, the publication in which the article appears, and how 
often the piece has been cited in other scholarly literature. GS claims to 
place the most relevant results always on the first page. 

 
 
Some Features : 
• 
Search diverse sources from one convenient place 
• 
Find papers, abstracts and citations 
• 
Locate the complete paper through patron's library or on the web 
• 
Learn about key papers in any area of research 
• 
Google Scholar strongly recommends indexing full-text versions 
of the work to be submitted to GS. 
• 
Indexes  magazines  that  are  suitable  primarily  for  a  scholarly 
audience • Google Scholar indexes only scholarly articles. For textbooks 
and monographs Google Book Search can be used. • Indexes Research 
Articles of the Professional society • Indexes Dissertations and Technical 
Reports e Usage Statistics Available through web server logs 
• 
No charge for Google Scholar referrals 
• 
Indexing  of  Searchable  PDF,  HTML,  PostScript,  compressed 
PostScript (ps.gz), and compressed PDF (pdf.gz). 
• 
Google Scholar strongly recommend preserving the full PDF layout 
information. 
 
 
Google Book Search  Search the full text of books to find once that interest readers and 
gi location where to buy or borrow them. 
Google Blog Search  Blog Search is Google search technology focused on blo 
Google is a strong believer in the self-publishing phenomen 
represented by blogging, and it hopes Blog Search will h 
users to explore the blogging universe more effectively, a 
perhaps inspire many to join the revolution themselves. 

| Google Book Search   | Search the full text of books to find once that interest readers and   |
|                      | gi location where to buy or borrow them.                               |
|:---------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Google Blog Search   | Blog Search is Google search technology focused on blo                 |
|                      | Google is a strong believer in the self-publishing phenomen            |
|                      | represented by blogging, and it hopes Blog Search will h               |
|                      | users to explore the blogging universe more effectively, a             |
|                      | perhaps inspire many to join the revolution themselves.                |

 
Google Groups  Google Groups is a free service which helps people form online 
communities based around shared interests. One can create his/her 
own groups and mailing lists, and search over all public Google 
Groups content, including more than 1 billion postings from the 
Usenet bulletin board service. Every group has its own unique 
emai address and Google-fast search, making it easy to find 
discussions from deep in respective group's archive. 
 
 
BASE  (Bielefeld  Academic 
Search Engine) 
 
BASE  is  one  of  the  world's  most  voluminous  search  engines 
especially for academic web resources. BASE provides more than 
240 million documents from more than 8,000 content providers. You 
can access the full texts of about 60% of the indexed documents for 
free  (Open  Access).  BASE  is  operated  by  Bielefeld  University 
Library. 
We are indexing the metadata of all kinds of academically relevant 
resources — journals, institutional repositories, digital collections etc. 
which provide an OAI interface and use OAI-PMH for providing 
their contents (see our Golden Rules for Repository Managers). 
The index is continuously enhanced by integrating further sources / 
content provider (Become a content provider). We are working on 
several new features like a claiming service for authors within the 
ORCID DE project. 
BASE is a registered OAI service provider. Database managers can 
integrate  the  BASE  index  into  their  local  infrastructure  (for 
examplee.g.  meta  search  engines,  library  catalogues).  Further  on 
there are several tools and servicesfor users, database and repository 
managers. 
In comparison to commercial search engines, BASE is characterized by 
the following features: 

| 0             | 1                                                                 |
|:--------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Google Groups | Google Groups is a free service which helps people form online    |
|               | communities based around shared interests. One can create his/her |
|               | own groups and mailing lists, and search over all public Google   |
|               | Groups content, including more than 1 billion postings from the   |
|               | Usenet bulletin board service. Every group has its own unique     |
|               | emai address and Google-fast search, making it easy to find       |
|               | discussions from deep in respective group's archive.              |

 
 Content  providers  are  indexed  only  after  check  by  qualified 
personnel of Bielefeld University Library. 
 Only  document  servers  and  journals  that  comply  with  the 
specific requirements of academic quality and relevance are 
included. 
 Our  list  of  content  providers  provides  transparency  in  the 
searches. 
 Discloses  web  resources  of  the  "Deep  Web",  which  are 
ignored by commercial search engines or get lost in the vast 
quantity of hits. 
 Normalization, Correction and enrichment of metadata by means 
of automated methods. 
 Multilingual search (find search terms in more than 20 translated 
languages). 
 The display of search results includes precise bibliographic data 
 Display of access and terms of re-use for a document. 
 Several options for sorting the result list (by author, title, date). 
 "Refine your search result" options (by author, subject, DDC, 
year of publication, content provider, language, document type, 
access and terms of re-use). 
 Browsing by DDC (Dewey Decimal Classification), document 
type, access and terms of re-use / license. 
 
Base  consists  of 
following search :
 
 Basic search  
 Advanced Search. 
 Browsing. 
 Search history. 
 
Scirus 

 
Scirus is a powerful Internet search tool developed especially for 
finding scientific information. The wealth of scientific information and 
academic knowledge accessible via the Web is virtually limitless. But 
accessibility to this wealth of knowledge is proving to be more 
complicated and time consuming day by day. It has been developed 
especially for scientists, researchers and students. It enables anyone 
searching for scientific information to pinpoint the information they 
need - including pre reviewed articles, patent information, author home 
pages and university web sites - quickly and easily. 
Scirus:  Historical 
Background 
Scirus was a seer who came from Dodona at the time of the war 
between Eleusis and Athens. He was killed in this war, and the place 
Scirus near Eleusis was named after him. The business of seers or 
prophets has been thought to be that of judging the signs of what is yet 
to come. For example, a seer knew whether a man would meet death, 
disease or loss of property, or in time of war, whether he would meet 
victory or defeat. They often interpreted the will of heaven by 
explaining dreams, watching the flights of birds, or gazing at the 
entrails of sacrificed victims. Scirus supports scientists in their role as 
seers. 
Innovative features: 
• 
Searches the whole web including access-controlled sites 
• 
Targets scientific information only 
• 
Covers more than 250 million science related pages 
• 
Finds more peer-reviewed articles than any other search engine 
• 
Reads non-text files in PDF, Postscript, and others 
• 
Yields more precise results because it indexes complete documents 
• 
Pinpoint scientific, scholarly, technical, and medical data on the 
Web. 
• 
Find  the  latest  reports,  peer-reviewed  articles,  patents,  preprints 
and journals that other search engines miss. 

 
• 
Offer unique functionalities designed for scientists and researchers. 
Scirus crawls  and  indexes scientific  sites  and  adds  a  classification  to 
these  sites,  which  gives  scientists  the  possibility  of  searching  within 
subject related areas. This enables scientists to chart and pinpoint data, 
locate University sites, and find reports and articles in a clutter-free, user 
friendly and efficient manner. 
 
Basic Search  Scirus offers two general search options: "basic" "advanced". 
In the basic, keyword search option, the defau set to search 
"All journal sources" and "All web sources". U can change 
these default options by deselecting the option(s interest in 
their respective check boxes. Within the basic sea users can 
search by "Exact phrase" by selecting that opt • Keywords 
can be combined using one (or more)Bool operators "OR" 
"AND" "NO (http://www.scirus.com/srsapp/tips. 
Advanced  Users can also search Scirus using an "Advanced search" 
interface. The advanced search allows the user to search "Th 
Searching 
complete document", "Article title", "Journal title", "Author 
name(s)",  "Author  affiliation(s)",  "Keyword(s)  ISSN",  or 
"(Part of a) URL" by selecting the option of interest from a 
drop-down  menu.  An  initial  search  statement  (e.g.  "red 
squirrel") can be combined with another by selecting the sea 
e i.e. "All of the words" "An of the words" "Exact 
  phrase") and by entering a secondary search term or phrase 
(e.g. "Sciurus vulgaris") in a different, yet identical  Search 
statements  can  be  combined  by  selecting  the  Boolean 
operator  of  interest  (AND,  OR,  ANDNOT)  from  the 
associate dro -down menu. 
 
 
Field codes 
Within  the  basic  search  (as  well  as  the  advanced  search),  users  can 
restrict a search to one of several select record fields using field codes. 
Field codes must be followed by a colon ('Q"), with no spacing after the 
colon as follows: * "au" [author]  
tl [title keyword]  
* '30" [journal]  
* "ke" [keyword]  

| Basic Search   | Scirus offers two general search options: "basic" "advanced".   |
|                | In the basic, keyword search option, the defau set to search    |
|                | "All journal sources" and "All web sources". U can change       |
|                | these default options by deselecting the option(s interest in   |
|                | their respective check boxes. Within the basic sea users can    |
|                | search by "Exact phrase" by selecting that opt • Keywords       |
|                | can be combined using one (or more)Bool operators "OR"          |
|                | "AND" "NO (http://www.scirus.com/srsapp/tips.                   |
|:---------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------|
| Advanced       | Users can also search Scirus using an "Advanced search"         |
| Searching      | interface. The advanced search allows the user to search "Th    |
|                | complete document", "Article title", "Journal title", "Author   |
|                | name(s)", "Author affiliation(s)", "Keyword(s) ISSN", or        |
|                | "(Part of a) URL" by selecting the option of interest from a    |
|                | drop-down menu. An initial search statement (e.g. "red          |
|                | squirrel") can be combined with another by selecting the sea    |
|                | e i.e. "All of the words" "An of the words" "Exact              |
|                | phrase") and by entering a secondary search term or phrase      |
|                | (e.g. "Sciurus vulgaris") in a different, yet identical Search  |
|                | statements can be combined by selecting the Boolean             |
|                | operator of interest (AND, OR, ANDNOT) from the                 |
|                | associate dro -down menu.                                       |

 
* "url" [URL]  
* "dom" [domain] . 
* "af" [author affiliation(s)]  
As  a  service  for  users,  Scirus  provides  free  access  to  the  "Latest 
Scientific News — from New Scientist" in the upper left-hand corner of 
the basic search page (www.scirus.com/srsapp/news/). 
Advantages of Using Scirus 
Search engines are all different in the Web sites they cover, and the way 
they  classify  these  Web  sites.  Scirus,  the  search  engine  for  science, 
focuses only on Web pages containing scientific content. Searching more 
than  250  million  science-related  pages,  Scirus  helps  quickly  locating 
scientific information on the Web: 
• 
Filters out non-scientific sites. For example, if we search on REM, 
Google finds the rock group - Scirus finds information on sleep, among 
other things 
• 
Finds  peer-reviewed  articles  such  as  PDF  and  PostScript  files, 
which are often invisible to other search engines. 
• 
Searches the most comprehensive combination of web information, 
preprint  servers,  digital  archives,  repositories  and  patent  and  journal 
databases. Scirus goes deeper than the first two levels of a Web site, 
thereby revealing much more relevant information. 
Scirus Downloads 
• 
Scirus Search Box: To give library's Web site greater functionality and 
enhance the experience of users. 
Scirus Toolbar: To helps finding scientific, technical and medical 
 
Conclusion 
We are living in the world of information overload. This information 
resides at numerous places in different formats. But the tragedy is this 
information is not having a single window access. Moreover, their exits 

 
no robust and full proof solution to access the giant invisible web. The 
method of information storage and publication includes conventional 
methods as well as new tools like institutional repositories, blogs, wikis 
and other grey literature publication methods. Most of them allow to 
publish the content taking within no time (lesser than cooking time of 
instant noodles). 