open_agb_firm
open_agb_firm is a bare metal interface for natively running GBA games and homebrew using the
3DS’s built‑in GBA hardware.
open_agb_firm is also a complete and better alternative to GBA VC injects (AGB_FIRM), allowing for:
* Launching GBA files directly from the SD card * Writing save files directly to the SD card * Automatic
save type configuration using an included database * User configuration, such as gamma settings *
Button remapping * Border support for 1:1 scaling mode * And more to come!
Disclaimer
open_agb_firm is currently in alpha. While open_agb_firm is relatively stable and safe to use, some
quirks that have not been fixed. See Known Issues for more information.
Additionally, we are not responsible for any damage that may occur to your system as a direct or indi‑
rect result of you using open_agb_firm.
Setup
• Download the latest release and extract it.
• Copy the open_agb_firm.firm file to your 3DS’s SD card at /luma/payloads if you’re
using Luma3DS or elsewhere if you’re using fastboot3DS.
• Copy the 3ds folder to the root of your 3DS’s SD card. Merge folders if asked.
• Launchopen_agb_firmusingLuma3DSbyholdingSTARTwhilebootingyour3DSorassignitto
a slot if you’re using fastboot3DS.
• After open_agb_firm launches, use the file browser to navigate to a .gba ROM to run.
Controls
A/B/L/R/START/SELECT ‑ GBA buttons, respectively
SELECT+Y ‑ Dump screen output to /3ds/open_agb_firm/texture_dump.bmp * If the screen
output freezes, press HOME to fix it. This is a hard to track down bug that will be fixed.
X+UP/DOWN ‑ Adjust screen brightness up or down by backlightSteps units.
X+LEFT ‑ Turn off LCD backlight.
X+RIGHT ‑ Turn on LCD backlight.
1

Hold the X button while launching a game to skip applying patches (if present)
Hold the power button to turn off the 3DS.
Configuration
Settings are stored in /3ds/open_agb_firm/config.ini.
General
General settings.
u8 backlight‑Backlightbrightness*Default: 64*Possiblevalues: *Old3DS:20‑117*New3DS:
16‑142 * Values ≤64 are recommended.
u8 backlightSteps ‑ How much to adjust backlight brightness by * Default: 5
bool directBoot ‑ Skip GBA BIOS intro at game startup * Default: false
bool useGbaDb ‑ Use gba_db.bin to get save types * Default: true
Video
Video‑related settings.
u8 scaler ‑ Video scaler. 0 = none, 1 = bilinear, 2 = hardware. * Default: 2
float gbaGamma ‑ GBA input gamma * Default: 2.2
float lcdGamma ‑ Output LCD gamma * Default : 1.54
float contrast ‑ Screen gain * Default: 1.0
float brightness ‑ Screen lift * Default: 0.0
Audio
Audio settings.
u8 audioOut ‑ Audio output. 0 = auto, 1 = speakers, 2 = headphones. * Default: 0
s8 volume ‑ Audio volume. Values above 48 mean control via volume slider. Range ‑128 (muted) to
‑20 (100%). Avoid the range ‑19 to 48. * Default: 127
2

Input
Input settings. Each entry allows one or multiple buttons. Buttons are separated by a , without
spaces.
Allowed buttons are A B SELECT START RIGHT LEFT UP DOWN R L X Y TOUCH
CP_RIGHT CP_LEFT CP_UP CP_DOWN.
TOUCH reacts to all touchscreen presses. The CP in front is short for Circle‑Pad.
Note that button mappings can cause input lag of up to 1 frame depending on when the game reads
inputs. For this reason the default mapping of the Circle‑Pad to D‑Pad is no longer provided.
A ‑ Button map for the A button. * Default: none
B ‑ Button map for the B button. * Default: none
SELECT ‑ Button map for the SELECT button. * Default: none
START ‑ Button map for the START button. * Default: none
RIGHT ‑ Button map for the RIGHT button. * Default: none
LEFT ‑ Button map for the LEFT button. * Default: none
UP ‑ Button map for the UP button. * Default: none
DOWN ‑ Button map for the DOWN button. * Default: none
R ‑ Button map for the R button. * Default: none
L ‑ Button map for the L button. * Default: none
Example:
1 [input]
2 RIGHT=RIGHT,CP_RIGHT
3 LEFT=LEFT,CP_LEFT
4 UP=UP,CP_UP
5 DOWN=DOWN,CP_DOWN
Game
Game‑specific settings. Only intended to be used in the per‑game settings (romName.ini in /3ds/
open_agb_firm/saves).
u8 saveSlot ‑ Savegame slot (0‑9) * Default: 0
u8 saveType ‑ Override to use a specific save type, see values for defaultSave (0‑15, 255) * De‑
fault: 255 (disabled)
3

| 1 [input]              |
|:-----------------------|
| 2 RIGHT=RIGHT,CP_RIGHT |
| 3 LEFT=LEFT,CP_LEFT    |
| 4 UP=UP,CP_UP          |
| 5 DOWN=DOWN,CP_DOWN    |

Advanced
Options for advanced users. No pun intended.
bool saveOverride ‑ Open save type override menu after selecting a game * Default: false
u16 defaultSave ‑ Change save type default when save type is not in gba_db.bin and cannot
be autodetected * Default: 14 (SRAM 256k) * Possible values: * 0, 1: EEPROM 8k * 2, 3: EEPROM 64k
* 4, 6, 8: Flash 512k RTC * 5, 7, 9: Flash 512k * 10, 12: Flash 1m RTC * 11, 13: Flash 1m * 14: SRAM
256k * 15: None
Patches
open_agb_firm supports automatically applying IPS and UPS patches. To use a patch, rename the
patch file to match the ROM file name (without the extension). * If you wanted to apply an IPS patch
to example.gba, rename the patch file to example.ips
Known Issues
Thissectionisreservedforalistingofknownissues. Atpresentonlythisremains: *Sleepmodeisnot
fully implemented. * Using SELECT+Y to dump screen output to a file can freeze the screen output
sometimes. *SavetypeautodetectionmaystillfailforcertaingamesusingEEPROM.*Lackofsettings.
* No cheats and other enhancements.
If you happen to stumble over another bug, please open an issue or contact profi200 via other plat‑
forms.
Hardware Limitations
open_agb_firm using the 3DS’s built‑in GBA hardware. Unfortunately, this comes with limitations
compared to GBA emulators. This is a list of limitations we can’t solve in software or are very hard to
work around. * >32 MiB (>256 Mbit) games and homebrew. * Games with extra hardware built into
the cartridge (except real‑time clocks). Patches are required. * Proper save autodetection (can’t find
savetypeduringgameplay). *GBAserialport(akaLinkCable). *>32KiB(>256Kbit)SRAM(homebrew
games/emulators). * Reboots are required for switching between games. * No save states. Very diffi‑
cult to implement because no direct hardware access. * Sound has lots of aliasing issues. No known
workaround (hardware bug).
4

EEPROM Fixer
Most emulators output EEPROM saves differently than what open_agb_firm expects, making them
incompatible. Fortunately, they are very easy to fix, using this tool by exelotl.
The tool also works vise versa, if you want to use a save generated by open_agb_firm with an emula‑
tor.
FAQ
Q: Why isn’t open_agb_firm a normal 3DS app?
A: To access the 3DS’s GBA hardware, open_agb_firm needs to run with full hardware access, which
can only be provided by running as a FIRM.
Q: Is this safe to use?
A:Ofcourse! Whileopen_agb_firmdoesrunwithfullhardwareaccess,alotofworkhasbeenputinby
severalpeopletoensurethatnothingunexpectedhappens. Somebackendcodefromopen_agb_firm
is actually used in fastboot3ds!
Q: What games work with open_agb_firm?
A: In theory, all of them, except those that fall within the hardware limitations.
Q: How can I increase the brightness?
A: Increase the value of the backlight setting in config.ini. See Configuration for more infor‑
mation.
Q: Why do the colors look off?
A: The default gamma settings are intended to make up for the washed out colors the 3DS LCD has. If
they look weird to you, setting the outGamma setting to 2.2 might help.
Q: Why do some of my ROM hacks/homebrew games have saving issues?
A: open_agb_firm resorts to save autodetection when it can’t find an entry for the game it’s running
in gba_db.bin (which only containsdata forofficial games), and it’sa bit wonkyforgames thatuse
EEPROM or misleading SDK save strings.
Q: Why doesn’t my save file from an emulator work?
A: There’s a good chance that the save you’re having issues with is an EEPROM save, which most em‑
ulators output differently. See EEPROM Fixer.
Q: My game doesn’t save properly!
A:First,pleaseensurethattheGBAROMyouareplayingisnotmodifiedinanyway,andmatchesitsNo‑
Intro checksums. Second, make sure you aren’t using an existing .SAV file, because some may have
issues for various reasons. Third, make sure your gba_db.bin is up‑to‑date. If everything seems
5

to be in order but the game still doesn’t save properly, please open an issue so it can be fixed. In the
meantime, the useGbaDb and saveOverride settings may be useful (see Configuration for more
information).
Nightlies
If you want to test the latest changes you have 2 download options. The first is recommended.
With GitHub account
Log into your account, go to the Actions tab at the top, click on the first entry and download the file
under Artifacts (open_agb_firm_nightly).
Without GitHub account
nightly.linkisathirdpartysitetomakebuildsavailabletoeveryone. I’mnotaffiliatedwithnightly.link
or their developers and neither are they with GitHub. Use at your own risk.
https://nightly.link/profi200/open_agb_firm/workflows/c‑cpp/master/open_agb_firm_nightly.zip
Compiling
To compile open_agb_firm, the following needs to be installed: * devkitARM * CTR Firm Builder or
firmtool
Additionally,p7zip(orifavailable,p7zip-full)needstobeinstalledtomakereleasebuilds. Also,
make sure that the dma330as and firm_builder/firmtool binaries are in the PATH environ‑
ment variable and accessible to the Makefile.
Clone this repository using git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com
/profi200/open_agb_firmand update via git pull && git submodule update --
init --recursive.
Build open_agb_firm as a debug build via make, or as a release build via make release.
License
You may use this under the terms of the GNU General Public License GPL v3 or the terms of any later
revisions of the GPL. Refer to the provided LICENSE.txt file for further information.
Thanks to…
• yellows8
6

• plutoo
• smea
• Normmatt
• WinterMute
• ctrulib devs
• LumaTeam
• devkitPro
• ChaN (fatfs)
• benhoyt (inih)
• fastboot3DS project
• MAME
• No‑Intro
• Wolfvak, Sono and all the other people in #GodMode9 on freenode/Discord
• endrift, Extrems and all the other people in #mgba on freenode
• Oleh Prypin (oprypin) for nightly.link
• …everyone who contributed to 3dbrew.org
Copyright (C) 2021 derrek, profi200, d0k3
7