MODELLING WOLBACHIA INFECTION IN A SEX-STRUCTURED
MOSQUITO POPULATION CARRYING WEST NILE VIRUS
´
JOZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
Abstract. Wolbachia is possibly the most studied reproductive parasite of arthro-
7102 naJ 21  ]EP.oib-q[  2v07960.9051:viXra pod species. It appears to be a promising candidate for biocontrol of some mosquito
borne diseases. We begin by developing a sex-structured model for a Wolbachia in-
fected mosquito population. Our model incorporates the key effects of Wolbachia
infection including cytoplasmic incompatibility and male killing. We also allow the
possibility of reduced reproductive output, incomplete maternal transmission, and
different mortality rates for uninfected/infected male/female individuals. We study
the existence and local stability of equilibria, including the biologically relevant and
interesting boundary equilibria. For some biologically relevant parameter regimes
there may be multiple coexistence steady states including, very importantly, a co-
existence steady state in which Wolbachia infected individuals dominate. We also
extend the model to incorporate West Nile virus (WNv) dynamics, using an SEI
modelling approach. Recent evidence suggests that a particular strain of Wolbachia
infection significantly reduces WNv replication in Aedes aegypti. We model this via
increasedtimespentintheWNv-exposedcompartmentforWolbachia infectedfemale
mosquitoes. A basic reproduction number R is computed for the WNv infection.
0
Our results suggest that, if the mosquito population consists mainly of Wolbachia in-
fected individuals, WNv eradication is likely if WNv replication in Wolbachia infected
individuals is sufficiently reduced.
1. Introduction
Wolbachia is a maternally transmitted intracellular symbiont, and it is the most com-
mon reproductive parasite infecting a significant proportion of insect species, see e.g.
[27, 36]. Wolbachia typically inhibits testes and ovaries of its host, and it is also present
in its host’s eggs. It interferes with its host’s reproductive mechanism in a remarkable
fashion. This allows Wolbachia to successfully establish itself in a number of arthropod
species. Well-known effects of Wolbachia infections include cytoplasmic incompatibility
(CI for short) and feminization of genetic males also known as male killing (MK for
short), see e.g. [5, 16, 31, 32]. Another important well-known effect of Wolbachia infec-
tions is the inducement of parthenogenesis, see e.g. [9, 30]. All of these contribute to the
Date: September 12, 2018.
1991 Mathematics Subject Classification. 92D30, 34D20, 34C11.
Key words and phrases. Wolbachia, sex-structure, West Nile virus, epidemic, stability.
1

2 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
fact that the mathematical modelling of Wolbachia infection dynamics is both interesting
and challenging.
In recent decades a substantial number of mathematical modelling approaches have
been applied to model different types of Wolbachia infections in a variety of arthropod
species. Perhaps most frequently researchers have been focusing on the development of
mathematical models for Wolbachia infections in mosquito species. Many of the earlier
models took the form of discrete time matrix models, written for population frequencies,
see e.g. [33, 34], and the references therein. Using frequency-type models a number of
researchers investigated the possibility of coexistence of multiple Wolbachia strains, each
of which exhibits different types of the reproductive mechanisms mentioned earlier, see
e.g. [9, 10, 20, 34]. Among others, Wolbachia strains have been investigated as a poten-
tial biological control tool to eradicate mosquito borne diseases. Originally the focus has
been on Wolbachia strains that induce life-shortening of their hosts. This is because for
many vector borne diseases only older mosquitoes are of interest from the point of view
of disease transmission. Therefore the use of (discrete) age-structured population models
has become increasingly prevalent, see e.g. [28] and the references therein. Fairly re-
cently, in [26] the results of laboratory experiments were reported envisaging a successful
introduction of a life-shortening Wolbachia strain in the mosquito species Aedes aegypti.
In [26] three key factors, namely, strong CI, low fitness cost and high maternal trans-
mission rate, were identified as drivers of a successful introduction of the new Wolbachia
strain into an Aedes population. To this end researchers have developed and analysed
continuous age-structured population models for Wolbachia infection dynamics, which
take the form of partial differential equations, see [10]; which can often be recast as delay
equations, see e.g. [14, 15].
In recent years there have been substantial modelling efforts to theoretically investi-
gate the potential of biological control tools for limiting the impact of mosquito borne
diseases. It is now widely recognised that biological control represents a viable alter-
native to established methods such as the use of insecticides and bed nets. Among
others, the sterile insect technique has been investigated in the recent papers [7, 24, 25].
More recently, it was reported that particular strains of Wolbachia (completely or almost
completely) block dengue virus replication inside the mosquito hosts, see for example
[2, 17, 35]. To this end Hughes and Britton [19] developed a mathematical model for
Wolbachia infection as a potential control tool for dengue fever. Their work suggests that
Wolbachia may be effective as such a control measure in areas where the basic repro-
duction number R is not too large. These recent results underpin the possibility that
0
Wolbachia may be a promising candidate for biocontrol of mosquito borne diseases, in
general. Besides dengue, West Nile virus (WNv) is another well-known mosquito borne
disease of current interest. WNv infection cycles between mosquitoes (especially Culex
species) and a number of species, particularly birds. Some infected birds develop high
levels of virus in their bloodstream and mosquitoes can become infected by biting these

CONTROL OF WEST NILE VIRUS BY WOLBACHIA 3
infectious birds. After about a week, infected mosquitoes can transmit the virus to sus-
ceptible birds. Mosquitoes infected with West Nile virus also bite and infect people,
horses, and other mammals. However, humans, horses, and other mammals are ‘dead
end’ hosts. This virus was first isolated in the West Nile region of Uganda, and since
then has spread rapidly, for example in North America during the past 12 years. Since
there is no vaccine available, the emphasis has been mainly on controlling the vector
mosquito species. Some recent experiments, see [18], have confirmed that replication of
the virus in orally fed mosquitoes was largely inhibited in the wMelPop strain of Wol-
bachia. Interestingly, in a recent paper, Dodson et al [6] demonstrated in laboratory
experiments that the wAlbB Wolbachia strain in fact enhances WNv infection rates in
the mosquito species Culex transalis. However, in [6] the Wolbachia was not a stable
maternally inherited infection, but rather they infected transiently somatic mosquito tis-
sues, and hence the wAlbB infection did not induce significant immune response in the
mosquitoes. This is probably key to their findings. Here we will focus on modelling a
maternally inherited Wolbachia infection in a population model, which hypothesizes a
large number of successive generations. Nevertheless, the findings in [6] underpin the
importance of Wolbachia research in general and highlight the importance of contrasting
the findings of new theoretical, laboratory and field investigations.
In this work we introduce sex-structured models for Wolbachia infection dynamics
in a mosquito population. This will allow us to incorporate and study the well-known
effects of CI and MK of particular Wolbachia infections, simultaneously. First we will
treat a model which only involves the mosquito population itself. Then we will use this
model as a basis for a much more complex scenario incorporating WNv dynamics in a
Wolbachia infected mosquito population. The full WNv model will naturally include the
bird population, too.
2. Model for a Wolbachia infected mosquito population without WNv
2.1. Model derivation. We start by introducing a model for a Wolbachia infection in
a sex-structured mosquito population, incorporating sex-structure using a well estab-
lished approach originally due to Kendall [21]. More recent papers of Hadeler [12] and
Hadeler et al [13] derive and discuss sex-structured pair formation models in depth. We
only model (explicitly) the adult population of mosquitoes. Our model allows us to take
into account the well-known effects of cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI), incomplete ma-
ternal transmission, fertility cost of the Wolbachia infection to reproductive output, and
male killing (MK), at the same time. We note that it was shown in [9] that a stable coex-
istence of MK and CI inducing Wolbachia strains is possible, in principle. Introduction
of male killing Wolbachia strains in vector populations may have a significant effect on
the disease dynamics, as typically only female mosquitoes are transmitting the disease.
Also note that according to [35], those Wolbachia strains which cause greater disruption,
as in the case of dengue transmission, confer greater fitness costs to the mosquitoes. This

4 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
may well be the case for West Nile virus, hence we account for the reduced reproductive
output in our model.
We deduce our starting model from basic principles. In particular, first we deduce
mating rules arising at the individual level. Starting with the adult population of size N,
we construct a random mating graph. This is a bipartite graph, not necessarily complete,
in which each vertex has degree at most one. The vertices represent male and female
individuals and edges represent realized matings. Let us denote by M,M ,F,F the
w w
numbers of un/infected males and females, respectively. For every adult mating pair,
offspring is created according to the following rules. Below, m,f and m ,f denote
w w
uninfected/infected male/female individual, respectively. The parameter β models the
reduced reproductive output of Wolbachia infected females, τ measures maternal trans-
mission in the sense that it is the probability that a Wolbachia infected mother passes on
the infection to its offspring, q measures CI in the sense that when a Wolbachia infected
male mates with an uninfected female, q is the probability that there is no viable off-
spring. Finally, γ measures MK in the sense that it is the probability that a Wolbachia
infected male larva dies during its development. A complete list of parameter values will
be given later on. With this notation the mating rules are described below.
(1) m × f : create one pair of the same type (m,f).
(2) m × f : with probability β, create no offspring. This reflects the fecundity
w
reduction due to the Wolbachia infection. In the complementary case, with
probability (1 − β)τ(1 − γ), create a new pair (m ,f ), at the same time with
w w
probability (1 − β)τγ create (0,f ), i.e. a female only brood. This accounts for
w
male killing (MK). With probability (1 − β)(1 − τ) create a new pair (m,f).
(3) m × f : same as above.
w w
(4) m ×f: with probability q, create no offspring. This is the effect of cytoplasmic
w
incompatibility (CI). With probability 1 − q, create a new pair (m,f).
Notice that, in contrast to [10], the sex ratio at birth will not be 1 : 1, it is distorted
due to male killing. Also we allow different mortality rates for males and females, in
general. Therefore, even in the case when there is no male killing, the sex ratio would
be distorted, in general. Also, we assume that any offspring resulting from CI crossing
is uninfected.
We apply the mating rules described above to construct the birth function in our
model. If the population sizes in the four compartments are denoted by M,M ,F,F ,
w w
respectively, then the total number of possible matings is (M +M )(F +F ). The total
w w
number of matings for example between uninfected males and infected females is MF .
w
Hence the probability that a given mating of type m×f takes place is MF w .
w (M+M )(F+F )
w w
To compute the total number of matings per unit time we follow the harmonic mean birth
function approach from [22]. Accordingly, the total number of matings is proportional

CONTROL OF WEST NILE VIRUS BY WOLBACHIA 5
to
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
F + F F + F
w w
M + M
w
M + M + F + F M + M + F + F
w w w w
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
M + M M + M (M + M )(F + F )
w w w w
+ F + F = 2 .
w
M + M + F + F M + M + F + F M + M + F + F
w w w w w w
(2.1)
Hence the birth rate of offspring arising for example from the mating between an unin-
fected male and an infected female is proportional to MF w . We also naturally
M+M +F+F
w w
assume that there is competition between female individuals for finding an appropriate
water reservoir to lay eggs. This is taken into account via a function λ(F ) which we
total
assume (at least in the first instance) to be a monotonically decreasing function of the
total number of females F , to allow for this competition for nesting places. Though
total
λ(F ) is decreasing, it may approach a positive limit as F → ∞. This is to allow
total total
for the fact that gravid females that cannot find a place to lay their eggs may destroy eggs
previously laid by others, and lay theirs instead. Thus the overall egg-laying rate should
approach a positive limit as F → ∞, and therefore we assume that λ(F ) is a
total total
decreasing function such that λ(∞) > 0. Based on the individual mating rules explained
earlier, our model reads as follows.
λ(F )
M(cid:48)(t) = −µ M + total (MF + (1 − β)(1 − τ)(MF + M F ) + (1 − q)M F),
m w w w w
N
(2.2)
λ(F )
F(cid:48)(t) = −µ F + total (MF + (1 − β)(1 − τ)(MF + M F ) + (1 − q)M F),
f w w w w
N
(2.3)
λ(F )
M(cid:48) (t) = −µ M + total (1 − β)τ(1 − γ)(MF + M F ), (2.4)
w mw w N w w w
λ(F )
F(cid:48) (t) = −µ F + total (1 − β)τ(MF + M F ). (2.5)
w fw w N w w w
A complete list of the variables, parameters and coefficient functions appearing in model
(2.2)-(2.5) is given below.
• M : number of uninfected male mosquitoes.
• F : number of uninfected female mosquitoes.
• M : number of Wolbachia infected male mosquitoes.
w
• F : number of Wolbachia infected female mosquitoes.
w
• M = M + M , total number of male mosquitoes.
total w
• F = F + F , total number of female mosquitoes.
total w
• N = M + F , total number of mosquitoes.
total total
• β: reduction in reproductive output of Wolbachia infected females.
• τ: maternal transmission probability for Wolbachia infection.

6 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
• q: probability of cytoplasmic incompatibility (CI).
• γ: probability of male killing (MK) induced by Wolbachia infection.
• λ(F ): average egg laying rate, which depends on the total number of female
total
mosquitoes.
• µ : per-capita mortality rate of uninfected male mosquitoes.
m
• µ : per-capita mortality rate of uninfected female mosquitoes.
f
• µ : per-capita mortality rate of Wolbachia infected male mosquitoes.
mw
• µ : per-capita mortality rate of Wolbachia infected female mosquitoes.
fw
Model (2.2)-(2.5) is our starting point for a study of the Wolbachia infection dynamics in
a sex-structured mosquito population. Later, we will expand this model by introducing
WNv infection.
2.2. Positivity and boundedness. First we begin by establishing positivity and bound-
edness of solutions of model (2.2)-(2.5).
Proposition 2.1. Assume that λ is a monotone decreasing function such that
lim λ(F ) = λ > 0, λ(0) > min{µ ,µ }, λ < min{µ ,µ }, (2.6)
total min f fw min f fw
F →∞
total
hold. Then, the variables (M,F,M ,F ) satisfying equations (2.2)-(2.5) remain non-
w w
negative if they are non-negative initially, and they remain bounded for all times.
Proof. First note that the solution variables remain non-negative for all time; this follows
from results in [29]. Adding equations (2.3) and (2.5), and noticing that β ∈ [0,1],
q ∈ [0,1], we have
λ(F )
F(cid:48) ≤ − min{µ ,µ }F + total M F
total f fw total M + F total total
total total
λ(F )
total
≤ − min{µ ,µ }F + M F
f fw total total total
M
total
=(−min{µ ,µ } + λ(F ))F . (2.7)
f fw total total
Therefore,
¯
limsupF (t) ≤ F
total
t→∞
¯ ¯ ¯
where F is such that λ(F) = min{µ ,µ }. Note F exists since we assumed λ is
f fw
monotone decreasing and satisfies (2.6).
Since F remains bounded it follows that M is bounded as well, because adding
total total
(2.2) and (2.4) we have
λ(F )
M(cid:48) ≤ − min{µ ,µ }M + total M F
total m mw total M + F total total
total total
≤ − min{µ ,µ }M + λ(F )F
m mw total total total
≤ − min{µ ,µ }M + B, (2.8)
m mw total

CONTROL OF WEST NILE VIRUS BY WOLBACHIA 7
where B is an upper bound for λ(F (t))F (t), which exists since F (t) is bounded
total total total
and therefore so is λ(F (t))F (t). From the differential inequality (2.8), we can
total total
conclude that M is bounded, too. (cid:3)
total
2.3. Boundary equilibria and their stability. It is straightforward to see that model
(2.2)-(2.5) has only one non-trivial Wolbachia free boundary equilibrium E∗ = (M∗,F∗,0,0),
where F∗ satisfies
λ(F∗) = µ + µ , (2.9)
f m
and
µ F∗
M∗ = f , (2.10)
µ
m
under the assumptions that λ(0) > µ + µ , λ is a decreasing non-negative function,
f m
and λ(F ) → λ (with λ sufficiently small) as F → ∞.
total min min total
Note that there is no Wolbachia infected boundary equilibrium unless τ = 1, a case
that we shall treat separately later.
Theorem 2.1. Suppose that λ is a monotone decreasing non-negative function such that
λ(F ) → λ as F → ∞, with λ sufficiently small, λ(0) > µ + µ and
total min total min f m
µ (1 − β)τ
f
< 1. (2.11)
µ
fw
Then, the Wolbachia free boundary equilibrium E∗ = (M∗,F∗,0,0) of model (2.2)-(2.5)
is locally asymptotically stable.
Proof. Linearisation of system (2.2)-(2.5) at the equilibrium E∗ yields the following par-
tially decoupled systems. The first system below is just the linearisation of equations
(2.4)-(2.5) at the steady state, which we shall use to show that (M (t),F (t)) → (0,0)
w w
as t → ∞. System (2.13) is just system (2.2)-(2.3) in the case M = F = 0.
w w
 λ(F∗)
 M(cid:48) = −µ M + (1 − β)τ(1 − γ)M∗F ,
 w mw w M∗ + F∗ w
(2.12)
λ(F∗)
  F(cid:48) = −µ F + (1 − β)τM∗F ,
w fw w M∗ + F∗ w

λ(F)
 M(cid:48) = −µ M + MF,
 m
M + F
(2.13)
λ(F)
  F(cid:48) = −µ F + MF.
f
M + F
From the second equation of (2.12), it is clear that if
λ(F∗)
(1 − β)τM∗ < µ , (2.14)
fw
M∗ + F∗
then F (t) → 0 as t → ∞. Then M (t) → 0 as t → ∞ follows from the first equation of
w w
(2.12). Since M∗ and F∗ are given by (2.9) and (2.10), inequality (2.14) is equivalent to
assumption (2.11).

8 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
It remains to prove the local stability of (M,F) = (M∗,F∗) as a solution of system
(2.13). The Jacobian matrix of system (2.13) evaluated at (M∗,F∗) is given by
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 −µ µ µ2 + λ(cid:48)(F∗)F∗µ
J(M∗,F∗) = f m f f .
µ + µ µ2 −µ µ + λ(cid:48)(F∗)F∗µ
f m m f m f
The eigenvalues Λ of J(M∗,F∗) satisfy the characteristic equation
Λ2 + (2µ µ − λ(cid:48)(F∗)F∗µ )Λ − λ(cid:48)(F∗)F∗(µ + µ )µ µ = 0.
f m f f m f m
Since λ(·) is a non-negative decreasing function, λ(cid:48)(F∗) < 0. We have
Λ + Λ = −(2µ µ − λ(cid:48)(F∗)F∗µ ) < 0,
1 2 f m f
and
Λ Λ = −λ(cid:48)(F∗)F∗(µ + µ )µ µ > 0,
1 2 f m f m
which implies ReΛ < 0 and ReΛ < 0, so that (M∗,F∗) is locally stable as a solu-
1 2
tion of (2.13). Therefore, the Wolbachia free equilibrium E∗ = (M∗,F∗,0,0) is locally
asymptotically stable as a solution of the full system (2.2)-(2.5). (cid:3)
If τ = 1, i.e. we have complete maternal transmission of Wolbachia, then a boundary
equilibrium of the form (0,0,M∗,F∗) may exist. The components of such an equilibrium
w w
solution must satisfy
µ M∗ = (1 − γ)µ F∗,
mw w fw w
λ(F∗) (2.15)
µ = w (1 − β)M∗.
fw M∗ + F∗ w
w w
Moreover, (1−γ)µ +µ = (1−β)(1−γ)λ(F∗) must hold. Next we study the linear
fw mw w
stability of such equilibrium, showing that it is linearly stable under condition (2.16)
below. Inequality (2.16) does not depend on γ, the male killing rate, but the steady state
components M∗ and F∗ do depend on γ in the manner expected (for example, M∗ = 0
w w w
when γ = 1). Although Theorem 2.2 only apples if τ = 1, we will be interested later on in
the case when τ is just slightly less than 1. Then, maternal transmission is imperfect and
Wolbachia infected females produce small numbers of uninfected offspring. We anticipate
that as τ decreases from 1 to a value just less than 1, the equilibrium (0,0,M∗,F∗) shifts
w w
to another nearby position with small numbers of Wolbachia uninfected individuals and
large numbers of infected ones; with no change of stability for τ close enough to 1.
The existence and stability of such an equilibrium will be important later on when we
introduce West Nile virus (WNv) disease dynamics because, at a WNv-free equilibrium
with large numbers of Wolbachia infected mosquitoes, the basic reproduction number
R for WNv is likely to be less than 1. The implication is that Wolbachia infection in
0
mosquitoes has the potential to control WNv infection. It does so by disrupting WNv
virus replication causing WNv infected mosquitoes effectively to remain permanently (or
for a very long time) in the latent stage of WNv.

CONTROL OF WEST NILE VIRUS BY WOLBACHIA 9
Theorem 2.2. Assume that τ = 1, λ is monotone decreasing with lim λ(F ) =
total
F →∞
total
λ , (λ sufficiently small) and
min min
(1 − γ)µ + µ
fw mw
λ(0) >
(1 − β)(1 − γ)
holds. Then, an equilibrium of the form (M,F,M ,F ) = (0,0,M∗,F∗) exists, and it
w w w w
is locally stable as a solution of (2.2)-(2.5) if
(1 − q)µ < (1 − β)µ . (2.16)
fw f
Proof. The proof is similar to that of Theorem 2.1. The linearisation around (0,0,M∗,F∗)
w w
yields a system of linear equations for (M,F) that (when τ = 1) are decoupled from the
rest of the system. Moreover, it may be shown that (M,F) → (0,0) as t → ∞ if
(1 − q)M∗λ(F∗)
w w < µ
f
M∗ + F∗
w w
holds, which becomes inequality (2.16) when the equilibrium equations (2.15) are invoked.
Then, the F and M equations are considered, in the case when τ = 1 and F = M ≡ 0.
w w
Tedious computations yield that the linearisation of that system around the steady state
(M∗,F∗) has the Jacobian matrix equal to ((1 − γ)µ + µ )−1 times
w w fw mw
(cid:32) (cid:104)(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:105) (cid:33)
−(1 − γ)µ µ (1 − β)(1 − γ) 1−γ µ2 + λ(cid:48)(F∗)F∗(1 − γ)µ
fw mw 1−β fw w w fw ,
µ2 −µ µ + (1 − β)λ(cid:48)(F∗)F∗(1 − γ)µ
mw fw mw w w fw
and it may be further shown that its eigenvalues both have negative real parts. Thus we
conclude that the steady state (0,0,M∗,F∗) is locally asymptotically stable. (cid:3)
w w
Next we prove that, under certain conditions, both infected and uninfected mosquitoes
die out. Note, however, that (0,0,0,0) is not technically an equilibrium of (2.2)-(2.5).
Theorem 2.3. Suppose that λ is monotone decreasing and that 0 < λ(F ) < µ +µ
total f m
for all F ≥ 0, and that
total
(µ + µ )(1 − β)τ < µ . (2.17)
f m fw
Then (M(t),F(t),M (t),F (t)) → (0,0,0,0) as t → ∞ if all of the four variables are
w w
sufficiently small initially.
Proof. From (2.4) and (2.5),
M(cid:48) (t) ≤ −µ M (t) + (µ + µ )(1 − β)τ(1 − γ)F (t), (2.18)
w mw w f m w
F(cid:48) (t) ≤ −µ F (t) + (µ + µ )(1 − β)τF (t). (2.19)
w fw w f m w
From (2.19) and (2.17) we have F (t) → 0 as t → ∞. Then inequality (2.18) implies
w
that M (t) → 0 also. With M = F = 0, we are reduced to system (2.13) and we
w w w
now show that (M(t),F(t)) → (0,0) as t → ∞, though this result is local, i.e. for small
introductions of F and M. Note that (M,F) = (0,0) is not an equilibrium of (2.13), due

10 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
to the singularity, but we can remove that singularity by introducing the new variable
ξ = F/M. In terms of the variables ξ and M, system (2.13) becomes
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 − ξ(t)
ξ(cid:48)(t) = −(µ − µ )ξ(t) + ξ(t)λ(M(t)ξ(t)),
f m
1 + ξ(t)
(2.20)
M(t)ξ(t)
M(cid:48)(t) = −µ M(t) + λ(M(t)ξ(t)).
m
1 + ξ(t)
We now show that (ξ,M) = (ξ∗,0) is a locally stable steady state of (2.20), where
λ(0) + µ − µ
ξ∗ = m f , (2.21)
λ(0) + µ − µ
f m
provided ξ∗ > 0. The latter is not automatic. However, note that, from the first equation
of (2.13), M(cid:48)(t) ≤ (λ(0)−µ )M(t). Therefore, if λ(0) < µ then M(t) → 0. The second
m m
of (2.13) then gives F(cid:48)(t) ≤ −µ F(t)+λ(0)M(t) so that F(t) → 0. By similar reasoning
f
we arrive at the same conclusion if λ(0) < µ . Therefore, we may assume henceforth
f
that λ(0) ≥ max(µ ,µ ) and, under these circumstances, ξ∗ > 0. The linearisation of
f m
the second equation of (2.20) near the equilibrium (ξ,M) = (ξ∗,0) reads
ξ∗ 1
M(cid:48)(t) = −µ M(t) + λ(0) M(t) = (λ(0) − µ − µ )M(t),
m m f
1 + ξ∗ 2
and therefore, since λ(0) < µ + µ , we have M(t) → 0. In this limit the ξ equation
m f
becomes
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 − ξ(t)
ξ(cid:48)(t) = −(µ − µ )ξ(t) + ξ(t)λ(0) = F(ξ(t)),
f m
1 + ξ(t)
and to show that ξ∗ is locally stable as a solution of this equation, it suffices to show
that F(cid:48)(ξ∗) < 0. But, after some algebra, we have
(λ(0))2 − (µ − µ )2
F(cid:48)(ξ∗) = − m f .
2λ(0)
To show that F(cid:48)(ξ∗) < 0 holds, it suffices to show that λ(0) > |µ − µ |, i.e. that both
m f
λ(0) > µ −µ and λ(0) > µ −µ hold. But this follows from the fact that we are now
m f f m
restricting to the case when λ(0) ≥ max(µ ,µ ). Therefore, the proof of the theorem is
f m
complete. (cid:3)
2.4. Existence of strictly positive steady states. In this section we examine the
possible existence of coexistence steady states (M,F,M ,F ) of model (2.2)-(2.5), i.e.
w w
steady states in which each component is strictly positive. It turns out that in some
parameter regimes multiple coexistence steady states may exist while, in others, there
is just one or none at all. An understanding of these properties helps us to understand
how one might exploit Wolbachia infection in mosquitoes to effectively control WNv. In
this section we simplify by assuming that γ = 0, i.e. that there is no male killing.

CONTROL OF WEST NILE VIRUS BY WOLBACHIA 11
At the steady state, dividing (2.2) by (2.3), and (2.4) by (2.5), we obtain
µ µ
f fw
M = F , M = F . (2.22)
w w
µ µ
m mw
From (2.3) and (2.5) we then obtain
λ
∗
µ F =
f (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
µ µ
F 1 + f + F 1 + fw
µ w µ
m mw
(cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:19)
µ µ µ µ
× f F2 + (1 − β)(1 − τ) f FF + fw F2 + (1 − q) fw FF ,
µ µ w µ w µ w
m m mw mw
(2.23)
(cid:18) (cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:19)
λ µ µ
µ F = ∗ (1 − β)τ f FF + fw F2 , (2.24)
fw w (cid:16) µ (cid:17) (cid:16) µ (cid:17) µ w µ w
F 1 + f + F 1 + fw m mw
µ w µ
m mw
respectively, where λ = λ(F + F ). From (2.24) we have
∗ w
(cid:32) (cid:33)
µ2 (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
µ µ µ µ
fw fw f f fw
F µ + + F µ + = λ F(1 − β)τ + F (1 − β)τ .
w fw fw ∗ w
µ µ µ µ
mw m m mw
(2.25)
From (2.25) we obtain
F κ (λ ) = Fκ (λ ), (2.26)
w 1 ∗ 2 ∗
where
µ2
µ µ µ
fw fw f f
κ (λ ) = µ + − λ (1 − β)τ , κ (λ ) = −µ − µ + λ (1 − β)τ .
1 ∗ fw ∗ 2 ∗ fw fw ∗
µ µ µ µ
mw mw m m
(2.27)
Note that if at the strictly positive steady state, we have κ (λ ) = 0, then this necessarily
1 ∗
implies that κ (λ ) = 0. This is only possible if
2 ∗
µ µ
fw mw
= (2.28)
µ µ
f m
holds. This case is excluded from Theorem 2.4 but is treated in the next subsection.
If (2.28) does not hold then, using (2.27), from (2.23) we obtain
(cid:32) (cid:33)
µ2
µ µ
0 =κ2(λ ) µ + f − λ f − κ2(λ )λ (1 − β)(1 − τ) fw
1 ∗ f µ ∗ µ 2 ∗ ∗ µ
m m mw
(cid:18) (cid:19)
µ µ µ µ
f fw f fw
+ κ (λ )κ (λ ) µ + − λ (1 − β)(1 − τ) − λ (1 − q) . (2.29)
1 ∗ 2 ∗ f ∗ ∗
µ µ µ
mw m mw
The right hand side of (2.29) is, in general, a cubic polynomial in λ . If there exists a
∗
positive root λ1, then since λ is a strictly monotone function, a corresponding unique
∗
F1 + F1 value may be found. From (2.23) we may then determine a unique solution
w
(F1,F1). Further analytic progress is possible in certain particular cases of interest,
w

12 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
which we now investigate. The first concerns the case when τ = 1, or when τ is very close
to 1, meaning that maternal transmission of Wolbachia is complete or nearly complete.
This is in fact the biologically relevant case for a number of CI inducing Wolbachia
strains in mosquito species treated in the literature, see e.g. [9]. This leads us to expect
the existence of a steady state of (2.2)-(2.5) with large numbers of Wolbachia infected
mosquitoes and few, or no, uninfected ones. The stability of such a steady state still
depends on the other parameter values, and it will be stable if there is a high probability
of mating between infected males and uninfected females resulting in no offspring (the
effect of CI), i.e. q is close to 1; see also inequality (2.16) for the case τ = 1. The
existence of a stable steady state of (2.2)-(2.5) with the above mentioned properties
is important because the low number of Wolbachia uninfected females implies that the
quantity F∗, featuring in the first term of the parameter R defined later in (3.47),
s 0
is small. The likelihood of R being less than 1 (the condition for WNv-eradication)
0
depends mostly on that first term involving F∗, since the second term in (3.47) involves
s
a small parameter ε and is automatically small. For these reasons, we are interested in
stable steady states of model (2.2)-(2.5) of the form (M∗,F∗,M∗,F∗), with M∗ and F∗
w w
small compared to M∗ and F∗ (and, ideally, M∗ = F∗ = 0). Therefore, referring to
w w
Theorems 2.1 and 2.2, and restricting for now to the case τ = 1, we ideally would like the
boundary equilibrium (M∗,F∗,0,0) of Theorem 2.1 to be unstable, and the boundary
equilibrium (0,0,M∗,F∗) of Theorem 2.2 to be linearly stable. The conditions for this,
w w
when τ = 1, are that the inequalities µ (1−β) > µ and (1−q)µ < (1−β)µ should
f fw fw f
hold simultaneously, but note that the second of these follows from the first. For τ = 1,
guided by elementary competition theory, instability of one boundary equilibrium and
stability of the other suggests that there will be no coexistence equilibrium, and this is
what we prove in Theorem 2.4 below. If τ is decreased from 1 to a value slightly below
1, there is no longer a boundary equilibrium with only Wolbachia infected mosquitoes
present. What happens is that the equilibrium (0,0,M∗,F∗), which exists when τ = 1,
w w
moves to another nearby point in R4 , so that Wolbachia infected mosquitoes now coexist
+
with uninfected ones, the former being dominant. Very importantly, this will be the only
coexistence steady state if τ is sufficiently close to 1, and it is a desirable steady state
for WNv eradication because particular Wolbachia strains can significantly reduce WNv
virus replication in mosquitoes, see [18].
Theorem 2.4. Suppose that γ = 0, τ = 1, µ (1 − β) > µ , µ µ (cid:54)= µ µ , and
f fw m fw f mw
that λ is a strictly positive decreasing function with λ(∞) = λ (and λ sufficiently
min min
small). Then system (2.2)-(2.5) has no coexistence equilibrium with M∗,F∗,M∗,F∗ > 0.
w w
If the foregoing hypotheses hold, except that τ is slightly less than 1, then system (2.2)-
(2.5) has precisely one coexistence equilibrium in which Wolbachia uninfected mosquitoes
exist in very small numbers relative to Wolbachia infected ones.
Proof. Since we assume τ = 1, the form of (2.29) simplifies and in fact we may cancel
κ (λ ) since we seek equilibria in which M∗,F∗,M∗,F∗ > 0. After some further algebra,
1 ∗ w w

CONTROL OF WEST NILE VIRUS BY WOLBACHIA 13
we find that there is just one value for λ , given by
∗
(cid:32) (cid:33)
µ µ µ µ µ2 µ µ2
fw f f fw f f fw
λ q(1 − β) =(1 − β) − + q
∗
µ µ µ µ µ µ
mw m mw m m mw
(2.30)
µ2
µ µ
f fw fw
+ − (1 − q) .
µ µ
m mw
If λ ≤ 0 then the equation λ = λ(F + F ) cannot be solved for F + F , so we may
∗ ∗ w w
restrict to the case that λ > 0. Recalling that κ and κ are defined by (2.27), we find,
∗ 1 2
with λ given by (2.30) and with τ = 1, that
∗
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:20) (cid:21)
µ µ 1
m fw (cid:0) (cid:1)
κ (λ ) = 1 − µ + (1 − β)µ − µ , (2.31)
1 ∗ fw f fw
µ µ q
f mw
and
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 µ µ
(cid:0) (cid:1) f mw
κ (λ ) = (1 − β)µ − µ 1 − . (2.32)
2 ∗ f fw
q µ µ
m fw
Since µ (1 − β) > µ it follows that the sign of the product κ (λ )κ (λ ) is the same
f fw 1 ∗ 2 ∗
as the sign of
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
µ µ µ µ
m fw f mw
1 − 1 −
µ µ µ µ
f mw m fw
and, since we assume µ µ (cid:54)= µ µ , it follows that κ (λ )κ (λ ) < 0. This makes
m fw f mw 1 ∗ 2 ∗
it impossible to find F > 0 and F > 0 satisfying (2.26), and so there is no coexistence
w
equilibrium.
Next we prove the second assertion of the theorem. Let τ = 1−ε. Since we expect the
equilibrium (0,0,M∗,F∗), which exists when τ = 1, to move to another nearby point
w w
when τ = 1−(cid:15), for (cid:15) sufficiently small, we seek an equilibrium of (2.2)–(2.5) of the form
M(ε) =εM(1) + ε2M(2) + ··· ,
F(ε) =εF(1) + ε2F(2) + ··· ,
M (ε) =M∗ + εM(1) + ε2M(2) + ··· ,
w w w w
F (ε) =F∗ + εF(1) + ε2F(2) + ··· .
w w w w
Coefficients of ε yield
λ(F∗) (cid:104) (cid:105)
µ M(1) = w (1 − β)M∗F∗ + (1 − q)M∗F(1) , (2.33)
m M∗ + F∗ w w w
w w
and
λ(F∗) (cid:104) (cid:105)
µ F(1) = w (1 − β)M∗F∗ + (1 − q)M∗F(1) . (2.34)
f M∗ + F∗ w w w
w w
Using
λ(F∗)
µ = w (1 − β)M∗,
fw M∗ + F∗ w
w w

14 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
(2.34) reads
µ (1 − q)
µ F(1) = µ F∗ + fw F(1),
f fw w 1 − β
so that
(1 − β)µ F∗
F(1) = fw w . (2.35)
(1 − β)µ − (1 − q)µ
f fw
Note that F(1) > 0 because of the assumption µ (1 − β) > µ , hence from (2.33) we
f fw
conclude that M(1) > 0 holds, and
µ µ (1 − β)F∗
M(1) = fw f w . (2.36)
µ [(1 − β)µ − (1 − q)µ ]
m f fw
In conclusion, if τ is reduced from 1 to the value 1−ε then the equilibrium (0,0,M∗,F∗)
w w
moves to (εM(1),εF(1),M∗ + εM(1) ,F∗ + εF(1) ), with M(1) and F(1) given by (2.36)
w w w w
and (2.35), respectively. (cid:3)
Note that from the proof of Theorem 2.4 we can see that at the equilibrium the
µ
male/female ratio for Wolbachia uninfected mosquitoes is given approximately by f .
µ
m
Theorem 2.4 excludes the case when µ µ = µ µ , which we treat now. In
m fw f mw
µ µ
particular, we assume that γ = 0, and f = µ = fw . In this situation, we have
µ µ
m mw
M = µF, and M = µF . From equations (2.3) and (2.5) we obtain
w w
µλ
µ F = ∗ (cid:0) F2 + (1 − β)(1 − τ)(cid:0) FF + F2(cid:1) + (1 − q)FF (cid:1) , (2.37)
f (1 + µ)(F + F ) w w w
w
µλ
∗ (cid:0) (cid:0) F2(cid:1)(cid:1)
µ F = (1 − β)τ FF + . (2.38)
fw w (1 + µ)(F + F ) w w
w
From equation (2.38) we find that
(1 + µ)µ
fw
λ = λ(F + F ) = , (2.39)
∗ w
µ(1 − β)τ
(1+µ)µ
hence for the existence of a coexistence steady state it is necessary that λ(0) > fw,
µ(1−β)τ
(1+µ)µ
in which case there exists a unique c = F + F , such that λ(c) = fw holds. Then,
w µ(1−β)τ
from equation (2.37) we obtain
µ
f c(1 − β)τF = F2 + (1 − q)FF + c(1 − β)(1 − τ)F , (2.40)
w w
µ
fw
from which, using F = c − F, we obtain
w
(cid:18) (cid:19)
µ
0 = F2q + Fc (1 − q) − (1 − β)(1 − τ) − (1 − β)τ f + c2(1 − β)(1 − τ). (2.41)
µ
fw
For the existence of the positive steady state we need to guarantee that the quadratic
equation above has (at least one) positive (real) solution, and that the solution is less
than c.

CONTROL OF WEST NILE VIRUS BY WOLBACHIA 15
From equation (2.41) it is clear that in case of complete maternal transmission, i.e.
for τ = 1 there cannot be more than one coexistence steady state. In this case, from
equation (2.41) we obtain
(cid:16) (cid:17)
µ
c (1 − β) f − (1 − q)
µ
F = fw . (2.42)
q
Therefore, if
µ
f
1 − q < (1 − β) < 1 (2.43)
µ
fw
(1+µ)µ
holds, then we have 0 < F < c, and if λ(0) > fw also holds, then a unique strictly
µ(1−β)τ
positive steady state exists.
Circumstances under which (2.43) is likely to hold include that q is sufficiently close
µ
to 1 and, at the same time, β is sufficiently close to 1 or f is less than 1. The biological
µ
fw
interpretation is clear: for the existence of a coexistence steady state, the fertility cost
(or mortality increase) due to Wolbachia infection should be sufficiently large.
It is clear from (2.41) that we can never have more than two coexistence steady states.
On the other hand it is interesting to show that for some realistic parameter values it is
possible to have two coexistence steady states.
µ
To this end we consider the case q = 1, f = 1, and we assume that τ (cid:54)= 1, β (cid:54)= 1.
µ
fw
In this case, from (2.41), we have
(cid:32) (cid:115) (cid:33)
1 − β 4(1 − τ)
F = c 1 ± 1 − . (2.44)
1/2
2 1 − β
That is, for 0 < F < c to hold, we need to assume that
1/2
(cid:115)
4(1 − τ) 2
4(1 − τ) < 1 − β, 1 + 1 − < (2.45)
1 − β 1 − β
hold simultaneously. It is easy to verify that this can be achieved for any c, for example
µ
with τ = 0.99, β = 0.5. Note that the condition f = 1 can be relaxed, too. Also, by
µ
fw
continuity arguments, it follows that for parameter values close enough we still have two
coexistence steady states. We summarise our findings in the following proposition.
µ µ
Proposition 2.2. In the case when γ = 0, q = 1 and f = fw , there exists a set of
µ µ
m mw
values for the remaining parameters such that system (2.2)-(2.5) admits two coexistence
steady states.
In summary, we have shown that our Wolbachia model (2.2)-(2.5) may exhibit all of
the three qualitatively different possible scenarios, i.e. when there are 0,1 or 2 coexistence
steady states.

16 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
3. Model incorporating West Nile virus (WNv)
There has been considerable recent interest in West Nile virus (WNv), with the great
majority of mathematical papers on the topic having appeared in the last 15 years. Nu-
merous types of models have appeared, some including spatial effects and others giving
consideration to issues such as age-structure in hosts, optimal control or backward bifur-
cation. See, for example, Blayneh et al [3], Bowman et al [4], Gourley et al [11], Lewis
et al [23] and Wonham and Lewis [37].
We introduce the following model as an extension of model (2.2)-(2.5) to include WNv
dynamics. Our model for WNv dynamics has similarities to that in Bergsman et al [1]
with one resident bird population. Hence, as in [1] and in some references therein, we
compartmentalise the vector and bird population into SEI and SEIR classes, respectively.
Taking into account our earlier model the complete WNv-Wolbachia mosquito-bird pop-
ulation model takes the following form.
λ(F )
F(cid:48) = total (MF + (1 − β)(1 − τ)(MF + M F ) + (1 − q)M F)
s M + M + F + F w w w w
w w
B
i
− µ F − α p F ,
f s f bf s
B
total
B
F(cid:48) = α p F i − µ F − ν F ,
e f bf s B f e f e
total
F(cid:48) = ν F − µ F ,
i f e f i
λ(F ) B
F(cid:48) = total (1 − β)τ(MF + M F ) − µ F − α p F i ,
ws M + M + F + F w w w fw ws fw bf ws B
w w total
B
F(cid:48) = α p F i − µ F − εν F ,
we fw bf ws B fw we f we
total
F(cid:48) = εν F − µ F ,
wi f we fw wi
(cid:18) (cid:19)
B B
B(cid:48) = Π(B ) − µ B − α p F s + α p F s ,
s total b s f fb i B fw fb wi B
total total
B B
B(cid:48) = α p F s + α p F s − µ B − ν B ,
e f fb i B fw fb wi B b e b e
total total
B(cid:48) = ν B − µ B − µ B − ν B ,
i b e b i bi i i i
B(cid:48) = ν B − µ B ,
r i i b r
λ(F )
M(cid:48) = total (MF + (1 − β)(1 − τ)(MF + M F ) + (1 − q)M F) − µ M,
w w w w m
M + M + F + F
w w
λ(F )
M(cid:48) = total (1 − β)τ(1 − γ)(MF + M F ) − µ M , (3.46)
w M + M + F + F w w w mw w
w w

CONTROL OF WEST NILE VIRUS BY WOLBACHIA 17
where
B = B + B + B + B ,
total s e i r
F = F + F , F = F + F + F , F = F + F + F .
total w w ws we wi s e i
Some of the parameters of system (3.46) are defined after (2.2)-(2.5); the rest are defined
as follows:
• α : biting rate of female Wolbachia uninfected mosquitoes;
f
• α : biting rate of female Wolbachia infected mosquitoes;
fw
• p : transmission probability of WNv from infectious birds to WNv-susceptible
bf
female mosquitoes;
• p : transmission probability of WNv from WNv-infectious female mosquitoes
fb
to susceptible birds;
• ν : per-capita transition rate of WNv-exposed female Wolbachia uninfected
f
mosquitoes to the infectious stage of WNv;
• ε ∈ [0,1]: small parameter modelling increased time that Wolbachia infected
mosquitoes spend in the latent stage of WNv, due to the tendency of Wolbachia
infection to hamper the replication of WNv in mosquitoes;
• ν : per-capita transition rate of WNv-exposed birds to the infectious stage of
b
WNv;
• ν : per-capita rate at which infectious birds recover;
i
• µ : per-capita natural death rate for birds;
b
• µ : per-capita WNv-induced death rate for infectious birds.
bi
In this section, it must be emphasized that we are considering two different kinds of
infection. Mosquitoes may be infected by either Wolbachia or WNv, or both. WNv
infection is assumed possible only for female mosquitoes (since it is females that bite)
and is modelled using an SEI (susceptible-exposed-infectious) approach with subscripts
s, e and i. The variables F , F and F denote the numbers of Wolbachia uninfected
s e i
mosquitoes that have susceptible, exposed and infectious status with respect to WNv. A
subscript w indicates Wolbachia infection, so that F , F and F denote the numbers
ws we wi
of Wolbachia infected mosquitoes that have susceptible, exposed and infectious status
with respect to WNv. The variables M and M are the numbers of Wolbachia uninfected
w
and Wolbachia infected male mosquitoes, none of which have WNv. Birds are only
susceptible to WNv and their numbers are given by the variables B , B , B and B
s e i r
denoting susceptible, exposed, infectious and recovered birds. Many of the terms of
system (3.46) are also present in (2.2)-(2.5) without change, here we just discuss the
extra terms that model the addition of WNv dynamics. WNv-susceptible mosquitoes,
whether Wolbachia infected or not, acquire WNv infection by biting infectious birds; this
is modelled via the last term in the first and fourth equations of (3.46) using the idea of
mass action normalised by total host density, the biting rates (the α parameters defined
above) having been separated out, rather than being absorbed into the transmission
coefficients p and p as is often customary. Having acquired WNv infection from a
bf fb

18 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
bird, a mosquito enters the latent phase of WNv and is classed as an exposed mosquito.
Exposed mosquitoes become WNv-infectious at rates ν F and εν F for Wolbachia
f e f we
uninfected and Wolbachia infected mosquitoes, respectively. In the latter, the presence
of ε ∈ [0,1] models the tendency of Wolbachia infected mosquitoes that have contracted
WNv infection to spend a greater amount of time in the latent stage of WNv, since
Wolbachia infection tends to block WNv replication making it less likely that such a
mosquito would ever become WNv-infectious. Of course, we are at liberty to take ε very
small indeed, with the implication that the Wolbachia infected mosquito spends so long
in the latent stage of WNv that it probably dies in that stage. This is our approach to
modelling the blocking of WNv replication by Wolbachia.
Birds acquire WNv from bites by WNv-infectious mosquitoes, which may or may not
have Wolbachia infection as well. Thus there are two infection rates for birds, these
can be found in the right hand side of the seventh equation of (3.46), and also in the
eighth equation since birds initially enter the exposed stage of WNv. This has a mean
duration of 1/ν for birds, after which they become WNv-infectious. Birds may recover
b
from WNv, at a per-capita rate ν . Note that, for birds, death due to WNv is modelled
i
using a separate parameter µ to distinguish from natural death, accounted for by µ .
bi b
The function Π(B ) is the birth rate function for birds.
total
The approach we use here to model the latency stage of WNv (in either birds or
mosquitoes) is not the only possible approach. Our approach permits individuals to
spend different amounts of time in the latency stage, and we may only speak of the
mean time spent in that stage. There are other approaches in which all individuals of
a particular status (for example, all Wolbachia uninfected mosquitoes) spend the same
amount of time in the latent stage of WNv. The time could be different for Wolbachia
infected mosquitoes. These approaches result in models with time delays.
3.1. Local stability of the WNv-free equilibria. Equilibria of system (3.46) may ex-
ist in which WNv is absent. Such WNv-free equilibria include the equilibrium (M∗,F∗,0,0)
considered in Theorem 2.1, in which both WNv and Wolbachia are absent, and equilibria
in which WNv is absent but Wolbachia are present. We show that multiple WNv-
free equilibria may coexist that have both Wolbachia uninfected and Wolbachia infected
mosquitoes, we present a necessary and sufficient condition for any particular WNv-free
equilibrium to be locally stable, and we show that the most likely scenario for eradica-
tion of WNv is to have large numbers of Wolbachia infected mosquitoes, with solutions of
system (3.46) evolving to a WNv-free equilibrium that has large numbers of Wolbachia
infected mosquitoes and relatively few uninfected ones. Theorem 3.1 applies to any
WNv-free equilibrium, of which there may be several. Of course, we may have R < 1
0
at one WNv-free equilibrium and R > 1 at another. It depends on the values of F∗,
0 s
F∗ and B∗ for the particular WNv-free equilibrium under consideration. For clarity
ws s
of exposition, we include as a hypothesis that the equilibrium be stable to the subset
of perturbations in which WNv is absent (i.e. stable as a solution of the subsystem
(2.2)-(2.5)), rather than including explicit conditions for stability of an equilibrium as a

CONTROL OF WEST NILE VIRUS BY WOLBACHIA 19
solution of that subsystem. The latter stability problem is a tedious one in its own right
and is under consideration elsewhere in this paper. Theorem 3.1, in the form presented
below, highlights clearly the particular role played by R .
0
Theorem 3.1. Let F∗, F∗ and B∗ be the equilibrium values for the female susceptible
s ws s
(to WNv) Wolbachia uninfected and Wolbachia infected mosquitoes and susceptible birds,
in any WNv-free equilibrium. Let
(cid:32) (cid:33)
α2(F∗/B∗) εα2 (F∗ /B∗)
ν ν p p
b f fb bf f s s fw ws s
R = + . (3.47)
0
(µ + µ + ν )(µ + ν ) µ (µ + ν ) µ (µ + (cid:15)ν )
b bi i b b f f f fw fw f
Then, if R < 1, the WNv-free equilibrium under consideration is locally stable as a
0
solution of the full system (3.46), if it is stable to perturbations in which the exposed and
infectious variables remain zero.
Proof. At any WNv-free equilibrium, the linearisation of system (3.46) decouples to some
extent making it sufficient to show that, when R < 1, each component of the solution
0
of the following system:
α p F∗
F(cid:48) = f bf s B − (µ + ν )F ,
e B∗ i f f e
s
F(cid:48) = ν F − µ F ,
i f e f i
α p F∗
F(cid:48) = fw bf wsB − (µ + εν )F ,
we B∗ i fw f we
s
F(cid:48) = εν F − µ F , (3.48)
wi f we fw wi
B(cid:48) = α p F + α p F − (µ + ν )B ,
e f fb i fw fb wi b b e
B(cid:48) = ν B − (µ + µ + ν )B ,
i b e b bi i i
tends to zero. It is taken as a hypothesis that the susceptible variables then approach
their respective steady state values. Note that system (3.48) has a structure that allows
the application of Theorem 5.5.1 in Smith [29], making it possible to restrict attention to
the real roots of the characteristic equation associated with (3.48). That characteristic
equation, corresponding to trial solutions with temporal dependence exp(λt), is most
easily analysed when written in the form
(λ + µ + µ + ν )(λ + µ + ν )B∗
b bi i b b s
(cid:34) (cid:35)
α2F∗ εα2 F∗ (3.49)
f s fw ws
= ν ν p p + .
b f fb bf
(λ + µ )(λ + µ + ν ) (λ + µ )(λ + µ + (cid:15)ν )
f f f fw fw f
As functions of the real variable λ, the right hand side of (3.49) is decreasing, at least
for λ ≥ 0, while the left hand side is a quadratic with two real negative roots. A simple
graphical argument shows that if the left hand side exceeds the right hand side when
λ = 0 (i.e., if R < 1, with R defined by (3.47)), then any real roots of the characteristic
0 0
equation are negative which, since only the real roots need to be considered, implies that

20 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
Symbol Definition Value
µ Per-capita mortality rate of male mosquitoes 1/20
m
µ Per-capita mortality rate of female mosquitoes 1/20
f
µ Per-capita mortality rate of W-infected male mosquitoes 1/20
wm
µ Per capita mortality rate of W-infected female mosquitoes 1/20
wf
r Maximum per-capita mosquito egg-laying rate 30
k Competition coefficient for mosquitoes 5000
β Fitness cost of W-infection on reproduction ∈ [0,1]
τ Maternal transmission rate of Wolbachia ∈ [0,1]
q Strength of CI due to W-infection ∈ [0,1]
γ Male killing rate due to W-infection ∈ [0,1]
α Per-capita W-free mosquito biting rate 0.09
f
α Per-capita W-infected mosquito biting rate 0.09
fw
p WNv transmission coefficient from birds to mosquitoes 0.16
bf
p WNv transmission coefficient from mosquitoes to birds 0.88
fb
µ Natural per-capita mortality rate of birds 1/(365 × 3)
b
µ WNv-induced per-capita death rate of birds 0.1
bi
Π(B) Birth rate of birds 100/365
ν Per-capita rate at which W-free mosquitoes
f
complete WNv-latency and become WNv-infectious ∈ [0,1]
ε εν is the per-capita rate at which W-infected mosquitoes
f
complete WNv-latency and become WNv-infectious
ν Per-capita rate at which exposed birds become infectious 0.2
b
ν Per capita rate at which infectious birds recover 0.2
i
Table 1. Definition of parameters. Time is measured in days, and rates
in day−1. W stands for Wolbachia so that, for example, W-infection
means Wolbachia infection. Parameter values have been chosen purely
to demonstrate possible solution behaviour and are not based on data.
each component of the solution of (3.48) approaches zero as t → ∞. The proof of the
theorem is now complete. (cid:3)
4. Numerical simulations
In the simulations we set λ(F ) := re−F total/k, where r is the maximum per-
total
capita mosquito egg-laying rate, and k measures intra-specific competition among female
mosquitoes. It should be noted that our model assumes that the mosquito population
persists annually, as for example in the tropical climates of South-East Asia.

CONTROL OF WEST NILE VIRUS BY WOLBACHIA 21
x 104 x 104
3   3  
etats ydaets ta seotiuqsoM fo N etats ydaets ta seotiuqsoM fo N  2.5 etats ydaets ta seotiuqsoM fo N etats ydaets ta seotiuqsoM fo N  2.5
2 2
1.5  F 1.5  F
 F
w  F
w
1  τ = 0.9; γ=0; q=0.9 1  β = 0.05; γ=0; q=0.9
0.5 0.5
0  0 
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
 β  τ
x 104 x 104
3   3  
2.5 2.5
2 2
1.5  F 1.5
 F
 F
w  F
w
1  τ = 0.9; β=0.05; q=0.9 1  τ = 0.9; β=0.1; γ=0
0.5 0.5
0  0 
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 0.5 0.55 0.6 0.65 0.7 0.75 0.8 0.85 0.9 0.95 1
 γ  q
Figure 1. The dependence of the values of F and F at the steady
w
state of model (2.2)-(2.5) on the parameters β,τ,γ and q. Here, all the
per-capita mortality rates of mosquitoes were taken as 0.05, and we set
r = 30, k = 5000.

22 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
x 104
3  
2.5
 F
2  F w
seotiuqsoM 0
1.5
1
0.5
0 
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
 Time
Figure 2. Simulation of model (2.2)-(2.5) showing F and F against
w
time. Here, all the per-capita mortality rates of mosquitoes are taken as
0.05, and we set r = 30, k = 5000, β = 0.1, q = 0.9, γ = 0 and τ = 0.95.
5
4.5
R rebmun noitcudorper cisaB  
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
  ε
Figure 3. The basic reproduction number R , defined in (3.47), plotted
0
against ε. The parameter values are β = 0.1, q = 0.9, γ = 0, τ = 0.9,
with the other parameter values given in Table 1. For these parameter
values, F∗ = 3630, F∗ = 23837, B∗ = 300, and almost all of the
s ws s
mosquitoes are infected with Wolbachia. In this case, if ε < 0.03, the
basic reproduction number R < 1, and the WNv will die out.
0

|    |
|:---|
|    |

CONTROL OF WEST NILE VIRUS BY WOLBACHIA 23
300   10  
  ε = 0.02   ε = 0.02
  ε = 0.2 9   ε = 0.2
250
8
s
B sdrib elbitpecsus fo N  Fi B sdrib suoitcefni fo N  iw i
7
200
6
150 5
4
100
3
2
50
1
0  0 
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
  Time   Time
(a) B versus time (b) B versus time
s i
 M elamef detcefninu−W ,suoitcefni−vNW fo N   30   ε = 0.02   F M elamef detcefni−W ,suoitcefni−vNW fo N   70   ε = 0.02  
  ε = 0.2   ε = 0.2
60
25
50
20
40
15
30
10
20
5
10
0  0 
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
  Time   Time
(c) F versus time (d) F versus time
i wi
Figure 4. Simulation of model (3.46) with the parameter values as
given in the caption of Figure 3 for the cases ε = 0.2 and ε = 0.02. In
the case ε = 0.02, WNv dies out.

| 0        | 1        |
|:---------|:---------|
| ε = 0.02 | ε = 0.02 |
| ε = 0.2  | ε = 0.2  |

| 0        | 1        |
|:---------|:---------|
| ε = 0.02 | ε = 0.02 |
| ε = 0.2  | ε = 0.2  |

| 0        | 1        |
|:---------|:---------|
| ε = 0.02 | ε = 0.02 |
| ε = 0.2  | ε = 0.2  |

| 0        | 1        |
|:---------|:---------|
| ε = 0.02 | ε = 0.02 |
| ε = 0.2  | ε = 0.2  |

24 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
5
4.5
0
R rebmun noitcudorper cisaB  0 4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
  τ
Figure 5. Basic reproduction number R , plotted against τ, with β =
0
0.1, q = 0.9, γ = 0, ε = 0.02, and the other parameter values given in
Table 1. If τ > 0.9 the basic reproduction number R < 1, and WNv
0
will die out.
5
4.5
R rebmun noitcudorper cisaB  
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
  q
Figure 6. Basic reproduction number R , plotted against q, with β =
0
0.1, τ = 0.9, γ = 0, ε = 0.02, and the other parameter values given in
Table 1. If q > 0.8 the basic reproduction number R < 1, and WNv
0
will die out.

|    |
|:---|
|    |

|    |
|:---|
|    |

CONTROL OF WEST NILE VIRUS BY WOLBACHIA 25
5
4.5
0
R rebmun noitcudorper cisaB  0
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
  β
Figure 7. Basic reproduction number R , plotted against β, with τ =
0
0.9, q = 0.9, γ = 0, ε = 0.02, and the other parameter values given in
Table 1. If β < 0.3 the basic reproduction number R < 1, and WNv
0
will die out.
5
4.5
R rebmun noitcudorper cisaB  
4
3.5
3
2.5
2
1.5
1
0.5
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
  γ
Figure 8. Basic reproduction number R , plotted against γ, with β =
0
0.1, q = 0.9, τ = 0.9, ε = 0.02, and the other parameter values given in
Table 1. If γ < 0.65 the basic reproduction number R < 1, and WNv
0
will die out.
5. Conclusion
In this paper we have derived a detailed sex-structured model for a mosquito popula-
tion infected with Wolbachia . The model captures many of the well-known key effects of

|    |
|:---|
|    |

|    |
|:---|
|    |

26 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
Wolbachia infection, including cytoplasmic incompatibility, male killing, reduction in re-
productive output and incomplete maternal transmission of the Wolbachia infection. Our
analysis shows that the mosquito population can stabilise at a Wolbachia free equilibrium
under certain circumstances, which include situations when inequality (2.11) holds. Such
circumstances include, for example, if Wolbachia infection significantly reduces reproduc-
tive output, and/or Wolbachia infection significantly lowers female life expectancy. We
also showed that if τ = 1, i.e. maternal transmission of Wolbachia is complete, then the
mosquito population can stabilise at an equilibrium in which all mosquitoes are infected
with Wolbachia. This happens in the case of sufficiently high cytoplasmic incompatibil-
ity. In the case of τ close to 1 we have shown that Wolbachia infected mosquitoes can
coexist with small numbers of uninfected mosquitoes. We have also shown that under
some additional assumptions our model has multiple coexistence steady states.
We extended the sex-structured mosquito population model (2.2)-(2.5) to include West
Nile virus, which is spread by birds and mosquitoes, treating WNv as an SEI infection for
mosquitoes, and as an SEIR infection for birds. We were motivated by results recently
reported in [18], which suggest that a particular strain of Wolbachia substantially reduces
WNv replication in the mosquito species Aedes aegypti. We modelled this crucial phe-
nomenon by incorporating a small parameter ε, the reciprocal of which is proportional
to the time spent in the WNv exposed class for Wolbachia infected mosquitoes. This
enabled us to assess the potential of Wolbachia infection to eradicate WNv via its effect
on WNv replication in Wolbachia infected mosquitoes. Notably the expression we ob-
tained for the basic reproduction number R suggests that WNv will be eradicated if at
0
the steady state the overwhelming majority of mosquitoes are infected with Wolbachia,
and the Wolbachia infection substantially reduces WNv replication in mosquitoes. The
first of these hypotheses is in fact shown to hold for a number of Wolbachia strains and
mosquito species, see e.g. [8].
Acknowledgments
We thank the American Institute of Mathematics for financial support through the
SQuaRE program. We also thank the reviewers for their helpful comments.
References
[1] L. D. Bergsman, J. M. Hyman, and C. Manore, A mathematical model for the spread of West Nile
virus in migratory and resident birds, Math. Biosci. Eng., 13 (2016), 401-424.
[2] M. S. C. Blagrove et al., Wolbachia strain wMel induces cytoplasmic incompatibility and blocks
dengue transmission in Aedes albopictus, PNAS, 109 (2012), 255-260.
[3] K.W. Blayneh, A.B. Gumel, S. Lenhart and T. Clayton, Backward bifurcation and optimal control
in transmission dynamics of West Nile virus. Bull. Math. Biol. 72 (2010), 1006–1028.
[4] C. Bowman, A.B. Gumel, P. van den Driessche, J. Wu and H. Zhu, A mathematical model for
assessing control strategies against West Nile virus. Bull. Math. Biol. 67 (2005), 1107–1133.
[5] E. Caspari and G. S. Watson, On the evolutionary importance of cytoplasmic sterility in mosquitoes,
Evolution, 13 (1959), 568-570.

CONTROL OF WEST NILE VIRUS BY WOLBACHIA 27
[6] B. L. Dodson, G. L. Hughes, O. Paul, A. C. Matacchiero, L. D. Kramer, and J. L. Rasgon, Wolbachia
enhances West Nile Virus (WNV) infection in the mosquito Culex tarsalis, PLoS Negl Trop Dis.
(2014), 8(7):e2965.
[7] C. Dufourd and Y. Dumont, Modeling and simulations of mosquito dispersal. The case of Aedes
albopictus, BIOMATH, 1 (2012), 1209262, 7 pp.
[8] J. Engelst¨adter and A. Telschow, Cytoplasmic incompatibility and host population structure, Hered-
ity, 103 (2009), 196-207.
[9] J. Engelst¨adter, A. Telschow, and P. Hammerstein, Infection dynamics of different Wolbachia-types
within one host population, J. Theor. Biol., 231 (2004), 345-355.
[10] J. Z. Farkas and P. Hinow, Structured and unstructured continuous models for Wolbachia infections,
Bull. Math. Biol., 72 (2010), 2067-2088.
[11] S.A. Gourley, R. Liu and J. Wu, Some vector borne diseases with structured host populations:
extinction and spatial spread. SIAM J. Appl. Math. 67 (2006/07), 408–433.
[12] K. P. Hadeler, Pair formation, J. Math. Biol., 64 (2012), 613-645.
[13] K. P. Hadeler, R. Waldst¨atter, and A. Wo¨rz-Busekros, Models for pair formation in bisexual pop-
ulations, J. Math. Biol., 26 (1988), 635-649.
[14] P. A. Hancock, S. P. Sinkins, and H. C. J. Godfray, Population dynamic models of the spread of
Wolbachia, American Naturalist, 177 (2011), 323-333.
[15] P. A. Hancock, S. P. Sinkins, and H. C. J. Godfray, Strategies for introducing Wolbachia to reduce
transmission of mosquito-borne diseases, PLoS Negl. Trop. Dis., 5 (2011), e1024.
[16] A. A. Hoffmann and M. Turelli, Cytoplasmic incompatibility in insects, In A. A. Hoffmann, S. L.
O’Neill and J. H. Werren (eds), Influential Passengers (1997), Oxford University Press, 42-80.
[17] A. A. Hoffmann, et al., Successful establishment of Wolbachia in Aedes populations to suppress
dengue transmission, Nature, 476 (2011), 454-457.
[18] M. Hussain, et al., Effect of Wolbachia on replication of West Nile virus in a mosquito cell line and
adult mosquitoes, J Virol., 87 (2013), 851-858.
[19] H. Hughes and N. F. Britton, Modelling the use of Wolbachia to control dengue fever transmission,
Bull. Math. Biol., 75 (2013), 796-818.
[20] M. J. Keeling, F. M. Jiggins, and J. M. Read, The invasion and coexistence of competing Wolbachia
strains, Heredity, 91 (2003), 382-388.
[21] D. G. Kendall, Stochastic processes and population growth, J. Roy. Stat. Soc. Ser B., 11 (1949),
230-264.
[22] N. Keyfitz, The mathematics of sex and marriage, Proceedings of the Sixth Berkeley Symposium
on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, Vol. IV: Biology and health, Univ. California Press,
(1972), 89-108.
[23] M. Lewis, J. Renclawowicz and P. van den Driessche, Traveling waves and spread rates for a West
Nile virus model. Bull. Math. Biol. 68 (2006), 3–23.
[24] J. Li, Modelling of transgenic mosquitoes and impact on malaria transmission, J. Biol. Dyn., 5
(2011), 474-494.
[25] J. Li and Z. Yuan, Modelling releases of sterile mosquitoes with different strategies, J. Biol. Dyn.,
9 (2015), 1-14.
[26] C. J. McMeniman et al., Stable introduction of a life-shortening Wolbachia infection into the
mosquito Aedes aegypti, Science, 323 (2009), 141-144.
[27] S. L. O’Neill, A. A. Hoffmann, and J. H. Werren (eds), Influential Passengers. Oxford University
Press, Oxford, New York, Tokyo, (1997).
[28] J. L. Rasgon and T. W. Scott, Impact of population age structure on Wolbachia transgene driver
efficacy: ecologicallycomplexfactorsandreleaseofgeneticallymodifiedmosquitoes, Insect Biochem.
Mol. Biol., 34 (2004), 707-713.

28 JO´ZSEF Z. FARKAS, STEPHEN A. GOURLEY, RONGSONG LIU, AND ABDUL-AZIZ YAKUBU
[29] H. L. Smith, Monotone dynamical systems. An introduction to the theory of competitive and co-
operative systems. Mathematical Surveys and Monographs, 41. American Mathematical Society,
Providence, RI, (1995).
[30] R. Stouthamer, Wolbachia induced parthenogenesis, In A. A. Hoffmann, S. L. O’Neill and J. H.
Werren (eds), Influential Passengers (1997), Oxford University Press, 102-124.
[31] A. Telschow, P. Hammerstein, and J. H. Werren, The effect of Wolbachia versus genetic incompat-
ibilities on reinforcement and speciation, Evolution, 59 (2005), 1607-1619.
[32] A. Telschow, N. Yamamura, and J. H. Werren, Bidirectional cytoplasmic incompatibility and the
stable coexistence of two Wolbachia strains in parapatric host populations, J. Theor. Biol., 235
(2005), 265-274.
[33] M. Turelli, Evolution of incompatibility-inducing microbes and their hosts, Evolution, 48 (1994),
1500-1513.
[34] E. Vautrin, et al., Evolution and invasion dynamics of multiple infections with Wolbachia investi-
gated using matrix based models, J. Theor. Biol., 245 (2007), 197-209.
[35] T. Walker, et al., The wMel Wolbachia strain blocks dengue and invades caged Aedes aegypti
populations, Nature, 476 (2011), 450-453.
[36] J. H. Werren, Biology of Wolbachia, Annu. Rev. Entomol., 42 (1997), 587-609.
[37] M.J. Wonham and M.A. Lewis, A comparative analysis of models for West Nile Virus. Mathematical
epidemiology, 365–390, Lecture Notes in Math., 1945, Springer, Berlin, 2008.
Jo´zsef Z. Farkas, Division of Computing Science and Mathematics, University of Stirling,
Stirling, FK9 4LA, United Kingdom
E-mail address: jozsef.farkas@stir.ac.uk
Stephen A. Gourley, Department of Mathematics, University of Surrey, Guildford, Sur-
rey, GU2 7XH, United Kingdom
E-mail address: s.gourley@surrey.ac.uk
Rongsong Liu, Department of Mathematics and Department of Zoology and Physiology,
University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071, USA
E-mail address: Rongsong.Liu@uwyo.edu
Abdul-Aziz Yakubu, Department of Mathematics, Howard University, Washington, DC
20059, USA
E-mail address: ayakubu@howard.edu