 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Oxidation parameters 1: MDA 
 
 
 
 
Date: September, 30th 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 

   
Oxidation parameters 1: MDA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Content 
 
1 Summary Information .................................................................................................. 3 
1.1 Partner Summary .......................................................................................................................... 3 
1.2 SOP Summary ............................................................................................................................... 4 
2 Protocol Steps ............................................................................................................. 5 
3 Linked SOPs ................................................................................................................ 5 
4 Disclaimer ................................................................................................................... 7 
5 Copyright .................................................................................................................... 7 
6 Citation ...................................................................................................................... 7 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 2 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
2 

   
Oxidation parameters 1: MDA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Summary Information 
 
1.1 Partner Summary 
 
SOP Code   EU_TRUE_SOP_020 
TRUE Partner Acronym  AUA 
Primary Author  Ntatsi, Georgia (ntatsi@aua.gr) 
Other Authors  Savvas, Dimitrios 
  
D. Mark Hodges, John M. DeLong, Charles F. Forney, Robert 
K. Prange 1999 Improving the thiobarbituric acid-reactive-
substances assay for estimating lipid peroxidation in plant 
tissues  containing  anthocyanin  and  other  interfering 
compounds Planta 207: 604-611 
https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s004250050524 
Linked Reference and 
Hyperlink   
(if available) 
Yong He, Zhujun Zhu, Jing Yang, Xiaolei Ni, Biao Zhu 2009 
Grafting  increases  the  salt  tolerance  of  tomato  by 
improvement  of  photosynthesis  and  enhancement  of 
antioxidant  enzymes  activity  Environmental  and 
Experimental Botany 66: 270–278  
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0098847
209000343 
 
Associated files to use with 
Not applicable 
the SOP [and function] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 3 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
3 

| SOP Code                     |
|:-----------------------------|
| TRUE Partner Acronym         |
| Primary Author               |
| Other Authors                |
| Linked Reference and         |
| Hyperlink                    |
| (if available)               |
| Associated files to use with |
| the SOP [and function]       |

| Linked Reference and   |
|:-----------------------|
| Hyperlink              |
| (if available)         |

| Associated files to use with   |
|:-------------------------------|
| the SOP [and function]         |

   
Oxidation parameters 1: MDA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2 SOP Summary 
 
Title  
 
 
Oxidation parameters 1: Malondialdehyde (MDA) 
 
 
Brief description  
 
 
The occurrence of malondialdehyde (MDA), a secondary end-product of the oxidation of 
polyunsaturated fatty acids, is considered a useful index of general lipid peroxidation. 
Malondialdehyde  is  formed  through  auto-oxidation  and  enzymatic  degradation  of 
polyunsaturated fatty acids in cells. 
 
Lipid peroxidation was determined following the method of He et al., 2009 and Hodges et 
al.,  1998.    Malondialdehyde  (MDA)  was  extracted  together  with  5  mL  of  5%  (w/v) 
trichloroacetic acid at approximately 0°C. The thiobarbituric acid test was used to assay 
the  MDA  content  in  leaves  according  to  the  method  of  Hodges  et  al.  (1999).  The 
concentration of thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) was calculated as MDA 
equivalents using the extinction coefficient of 155 mmol mol−1 cm−1 for malondialdehyde 
and expressed on a dry weight (DW) basis. Lipid peroxidation was determined according to 
the method of He et al., 2009 and Hodges et al., 1998. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 4 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
4 

   
Oxidation parameters 1: MDA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Protocol Steps  
 
•  0.1 g fresh tissue homogenised in 1 mL of 0.1% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA). 
•  The homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000 χ g (max rpm) for 10 min at 4 °C.  
•  The reaction mixture in a total volume of 1 mL containing: 
✓  in  the  +TBA  solution:  0.5  mL  of  extracts,  0.5  mL  of  0.65%  (w/v)  TBA  (2-
thiobarbituric acid) made in 20% TCA) (heat the reaction mixture of TBA and TCA);  
✓  and in the - TBA solution: 0.5 mL of extracts, 0.5 mL of 20% TCA) 
•  The reaction mixture was heated at 95 °C for 30 min and then stopped by quickly placing 
it in an ice-bath for 5-10 min. 
•  After centrifugation at 10,000 χ g for 10 min, the absorbance of the supernatant at 440 
(+TBA), 532 (+TBA, -TBA) and 600 nm (+TBA, -TBA) was read.  
•  After subtracting the non-specific absorbance at 600 nm of a solution containing plant 
extract incubated without TBA from an identical solution containing TBA, the TBA-MDA 
concentration was determined by its extinction coefficient of 157 mM-1 cm-1. 
Malondialdehyde equivalents were calculated in the following manner. First calculate:  
A = [(Abs532 + TBA) - (Abs600 + TBA) - (Abs 532 - TBA- Abs600 - TBA)] 
            B = [(Abs440 + TBA - Abs600 + TBA) 0.0571] 
 
with   Abs532 + TBA: Absorbance of the +TBA solution at 532 nm 
     Abs600 + TBA: Absorbance of the +TBA solution at 600 nm 
     Abs 532 - TBA: Absorbance of the - TBA solution at 532 nm 
     Abs600 - TBA: Absorbance of the - TBA solution at 600 nm 
     Abs440 + TBA: Absorbance of the +TBA solution at 440 nm 
          Abs600 + TBA:  Absorbance of the +TBA solution at 600 nm 
 
Then with A and B, calculate 
 
                   MDA equivalents (nmol. mL-1) = (A-B) / 0,157 
MDA equivalents (nmol. mL-1 g-1) ={(A-B) / 0,157) (1/g of sample)} 
 
We calculate 1 mL → 0.1g (We use 100 mg diluted in 1 mL of TCA, TBA) so 10mL → 1 g. That means 
that we need to multiple the MDA equivalents (nmol. mL-1 g-1) ={((A-B)/0.157) (1/g of sample)} with 
10. 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 5 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
5 

   
Oxidation parameters 1: MDA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  MDA equivalents (nmol. ml-1 g-1) ={((A-B)/0.157) (1/g of sample)} *10 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 6 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
6 

   
Oxidation parameters 1: MDA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 Linked SOPs 
   
SOP Code  SOP Function 
EU_TRUE_SOP_022  Oxidation parameters 2: H O  
2 2
EU_TRUE_SOP_023  Oxidation parameters 3: Electrolyte leakage 
 
4 Disclaimer 
 
The information presented here has been thoroughly researched and is believed to be accurate and 
correct.  However, the authors cannot be held legally responsible for any errors. There are no 
warranties, expressed or implied, made with respect to the information provided.  The authors will 
not be liable for any direct, indirect, special, incidental or consequential damages arising out of the 
use or inability to use the content of this publication.  
 
5 Copyright 
 
© All rights reserved.  Reproduction and dissemination of material presented here for research, 
educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorised without any prior written permission 
from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged.  Reproduction of material for 
sale or other commercial purposes is prohibited. 
 
6 Citation 
 
Please cite this report as follows:  
 
Ntatsi,  G.,  Savvas,  D.  (2018)  Standard  Operating  Procedure  021:  Oxidation  parameters  1: 
Malondialdehyde (MDA). Developed by the EU-H2020 project TRUE (‘Transition paths to sustainable 
legume-based systems in Europe’), funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and 
Innovation programme under Grant Agreement Number 727973. 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 7 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
7 

|                 | SOP Code   |    |                                             | SOP Function   |    |
|:----------------|:-----------|:---|:--------------------------------------------|:---------------|:---|
| EU_TRUE_SOP_022 |            |    | Oxidation parameters 2: H O                 |                |    |
|                 |            |    | 2 2                                         |                |    |
| EU_TRUE_SOP_023 |            |    | Oxidation parameters 3: Electrolyte leakage |                |    |