 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Soil Organic Carbon (OC) 
 
 
 
 
Date: September, 30th 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 

   
Soil Organic Carbon (OC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Content 
 
1 Summary Information .................................................................................................. 3 
1.1 Partner Summary .......................................................................................................................... 3 
1.2 SOP Summary ............................................................................................................................... 4 
2 Protocol Steps ............................................................................................................. 5 
Spectrophotometric determination of Phosphorus content in plant tissues (MURPHY-RILEY)错误!未
定义书签。 
Determination of K in plant tissues..................................................................... 错误!未定义书签。 
3 Linked SOPs ................................................................................................................ 9 
4 Disclaimer ................................................................................................................... 9 
5 Copyright .................................................................................................................... 9 
6 Citation ...................................................................................................................... 9 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 2 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
2 

   
Soil Organic Carbon (OC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Summary Information 
 
1.1 Partner Summary 
 
SOP Code   EU_TRUE_SOP_026 
TRUE Partner Acronym  AUA 
Primary Author  Savvas, Dimitrios (dsavvas@aua.gr) 
Other Authors  Karavidas I., Ntatsi G. 
 
 Walkley, A. and I.A. Black. 1934. An examination of the 
Degtjareff method for determining soil organic matter, 
Linked Reference and Hyperlink 
and  a  proposed  modification  of  the  chromic  acid 
(if available) 
titration method. Soil Sci.37:29-38 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/00010694-193401000-00003  
 
Associated files to use with the SOP 
Not applicable 
[and function] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 3 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
3 

| SOP Code                             |
|:-------------------------------------|
| TRUE Partner Acronym                 |
| Primary Author                       |
| Other Authors                        |
| Linked Reference and Hyperlink       |
| (if available)                       |
| Associated files to use with the SOP |
| [and function]                       |

| Linked Reference and Hyperlink   |
|:---------------------------------|
| (if available)                   |

| Associated files to use with the SOP   |
|:---------------------------------------|
| [and function]                         |

   
Soil Organic Carbon (OC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2 SOP Summary 
 
Title  
 
 
Soil Organic Carbon (OC) 
 
 
Brief description  
 
 
Soil  organic  carbon  improve  soil  structure,  water  retention,  soil  biodiversity,  buffering 
capacity and the cycling and storage of plant nutrients. In addition, the mineralization of soil 
organic carbon provides plant nutrients, especially nitrogen, phosphorus and sulfur (S), as 
well as with micronutrients. Therefore, the measure of soil organic carbon levels is necessary 
to determine the soil fertility. The Walkley-Black method was chosen as it is a simplified 
method, which provides accurate measurements on soils with high organic carbon content. 
 
Application and Principle 
 
The Walkley-Black (WB) method (Walkley and Black, 1934) determines soil organic carbon 
(OC) by oxidising carbon with acidic dichromate (K Cr O ). The oxidation step is followed by 
2 2 7
titration  of  excess  dichromate  with  ferrous  sulfate.  The  OC  is  calculated  from  the  the 
difference between the total dichromate added and the amount of dichromate left unreacted 
after the OC oxidation. The method provides an estimate of soil Organic Matter from OC 
determination assuming that the fraction of soil OC reacted and the amount of OC in soil OM. 
This method was widely considered a standard method for OM after its development, but the 
advance of thermal decomposition instruments has resulted in its limited use. Instead loss on 
ignition and thermal decomposition methods are more widely used due to their ability to 
analyse samples in a more time efficient manner.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 4 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
4 

   
Soil Organic Carbon (OC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Protocol Steps  
 
Equipment and Apparatus 
 
1.  Analytical balance with 0.01 g resolution 
2.  250-mL wide mouth graduated Erlenmeyer flasks 
3.  Repipetter to deliver 10 mL volume 
4.  Fume Hood 
5.  Titration stand and burette 
6.  Stir plate with light 
7.  Stirring rods 
8.  Weighing vessel 
 
Reagents 
 
1.  Potassium dichromate (K Cr O ), 0.167 M, 1 N 
2 2 7
Dissolve 98.08 g of oven-dried potassium dichromate in approximately 1500 mL of deionized 
water and dilute to 2 L. After preparation, transfer to a clean glass bottle for use with a 
repipetter to deliver 10 mL. Do not mix old potassium dichromate solution with the new 
solution. 
 
2.  Ferrous sulfate (FeSO .7H O), 0.5 M, 0.5 N 
4 2
Dissolve 278.02 g of ferrous sulfate in approximately 1500 mL of deionized water. Carefully 
add 30 mL of concentrated sulfuric acid, mix, cool, and dilute to 2 L. After preparation, this 
solution may be transferred to a clean 8-L plastic carboy. Do not mix old ferrous sulfate 
solution with the new solution. The tubing, stopcock, and attachments to the burette should 
be  rinsed  three  times  with  new  ferrous  sulfate  solution  before  titrating  any  blanks  or 
samples. Prepare a new solution every 30 days.  
 
3.  Ferroine (1,10-Phenanthroline-ferrous sulfate-complex) indicator solution, 0.025 M 
 Available from chemical supply companies. 
 
4.  Sulfuric acid (H SO )  
2 4
Concentrated and not less than 96%.  
 
Procedure 
 
1.  Titrate blank samples without soil before proceeding with any unknown samples. Add 10 mL 
of potassium dichromate into a 250 mL Erlenmeyer flask. Titrate with ferrous sulfate. Titrant 
volume should be approximately 20 mL. Record the exact volume of titrant to the nearest 
0.1 mL. If the titrant volume of the two blanks is not within 0.2 mL, clean the burette and 
associated tubing. Reanalyse two more blanks. 
 
2.  Weigh 1.00g of processed mineral soil (dried, <2 mm) into a 250-mL wide mouth graduated 
Erlenmeyer flask. If soil weight is not exactly 1.00 g, record weights for later calculation. 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 5 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
5 

   
Soil Organic Carbon (OC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.  Pipette 10 mL of potassium dichromate into each flask and mix carefully by rotating the flask 
to wet all of the soil. 
 
4.  Under a fume hood, carefully add 20 mL of sulfuric acid to each flask and mix gently. 
 
5.  Allow flasks to stand for 5 min under the fume hood.  
 
6.  Add deionized water to each flask so the final volume is approximately 125 mL. Mix by 
swirling gently.  
 
7.  Allow the samples to cool and return to room temperature. If volume is less than 125 mL 
after 30 min, add more deionized water to achieve 125 mL volume. 
 
8.  Add 5 or 6 drops of ferroine indicator solution and immediately titrate with ferrous sulfate. 
Use a mixing bar to thoroughly stir the sample as it is titrated. As the titration proceeds, the 
solution will take on a green colour that will change abruptly to reddish-brown when the 
endpoint of the titration is reached.  
 
9.  Record each volumetric reading to the nearest 0.1 mL. 
Calculations 
 
1.  Soil organic C (OC) is determined from the m  of K Cr O  (in mL) reacting with the soil to 
eq 2 2 7
oxidize organic C, which is the difference between total m  of K Cr O  (in mL) added to soil 
eq 2 2 7
and  the  m   of  FeSO   that  titrated  the  remaining  K Cr O   after  the  reaction. 
eq 4 2 2 7
 
OC  (%)  =  (m   K Cr O   -  m   FeSO )  ×  [0.003  (g.C.m -1)]  ×  cf  ÷  g  soil  ×  100 
eq 2 2 7 eq 4 eq
 
The oxidation state of C in organic matter is assumed to be 0. The C in organic matter is 
oxidised to CO  with an oxidation state of +4. Thus, the equivalent weight of C is 3 g (12 g C ÷ 
2
mole × mole C ÷ 4 eq C = 3 g C -1 = 0.003 g C m -1). An oxidation correction factor (cf) is 
eq eq
required since not all the organic C in soil is oxidized with room temperature oxidation. 
Correction factors can range from 1.14 to 1.32. 
 
2.  The m  of K Cr O  reacting with soil to oxidise OC is determined from the following equation. 
eq 2 2 7
 
(m  K Cr O – m  FeSO ) = (mLB – mLS) ×0.5 N 
eq 2 2 7  eq 4
 
with   mLB = average volume of ferrous sulfate to titrate two blanks of potassium dichromate 
without soil (in mL) 
mLS  = the volume of ferrous sulfate to titrate the sample (in mL) 
0.5     = the normality of the ferrous sulfate titrant 
 
 
 
3.  Substitution into the equation for OC results in the following. 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 6 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
6 

   
Soil Organic Carbon (OC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OC  (%)  =  (mLB–mLS)  ×  0.5  ×  [0.003  (g.C.m -1)]  ×  cf  ÷  g  soil  ×  100 
eq
 
Using a correction factor (cf) of 1.3 results in: 
 
OC (%) = (mLB–mLS) × 0.195 ÷ g soil 
 
4.  Since there is approximately 58% C in soil organic matter, soil OM can be determined as:  
 
OM, % = (mLB–mLS) ×0.195 ÷ g soil × (100 g OM ÷ 58 g OC) 
           = (mLB–mLS) ×0.336 ÷ g soil 
 
Analytical Performance 
 
Range and Sensitivity 
1.  This method is appropriate for mineral soils with OM content less than 6%. Soils with more 
than 6% OM should be analysed using a quantity of soil lower than 1 g to avoid difficulties 
in determining the colour change during the titration and consumed all the potassium 
dichromate, which oxidises the OM.  
 
2.  Each volumetric reading is recorded to the nearest 0.1 mL. This titrant volume change 
corresponds to 0.03% OM when 1 g of soil is used.  
 
Precision and Accuracy 
1.  To ensure good precision, you must be able to view the reddish-brown colour change at 
the endpoint to stop the titration. The aid of a stirring bar and a well-lit stirring plate can 
improve the ability to view the end point. 
 
2.  Results from 151 North American Proficiency Testing samples from 1999 through 2008 
show  median  interlaboratory  precision  of  10.6%  ranging  from  4.6  to  28.4%  (median 
absolute deviation/median x 100) with median soil OM of 2.0% ranging from 0.5 to 8.1%. 
 
3.  Intralaboratory precision from the University of Florida Extension Soil Testing Laboratory 
on  control  samples,  analysed  15  times,  averaged  1.09  ±  0.074%  (standard 
deviation/average x 100) for soils with OM ranging from 0.85% to 1.14%. 
 
Interferences 
1.  Ferrous iron and chloride in soil can result in positive errors in OM as these constituents 
can result in a reduction of K Cr O . However, ferrous iron should not be a problem in soils 
2 2 7
thoroughly air-dried since this step ensures almost complete oxidation of ferrous iron to 
ferric iron. Chloride should not be a concern in well drained soils devoid of any recent 
fertiliser application. Options for treating soils with high chloride can be found in Nelson 
and Sommers (1996). 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 7 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
7 

   
Soil Organic Carbon (OC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.  Manganese  oxide  (MnO )  can  compete  with  K Cr O   in  oxidizing  soil  OM  resulting  in 
2 2 2 7
negative errors in OM. This is a rare occurrence and only occurs with freshly precipitated 
MnO . 
2
 
Interpretation 
Interpretation of OM concentrations regarding soil fertility can be found In Magdoff et al. (1996).  
 
Effects of Storage 
1.  Air-dried soil can be stored indefinitely without affecting these measurements. 
 
2.  Potassium dichromate and ferrous sulfate solutions should be prepared fresh every day 
 
Safety and Disposal 
Potassium  dichromate  is  defined  as  a  hazardous  chemical  by  the  ResourceConservation  and 
Recovery Act due to toxicity (USEPA, 1980a). A laboratory generating more than 100 kg of material 
in  a  month  is  considered  a  hazardous  waste  generator  that  needs  to  follow  hazardous  waste 
disposal protocols defined by the US Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA, 1980b). 
 
Additional Reference 
Magdoff,  F.R.,  M.A.  Tabatabai,  and  E.D.  Hanlon.  1996.  Soil  Organic  Matter:  Analysis  and 
Interpretation. Soil Sci. Spec. Pub. No. 46:21-31. 
 
Nelson, D.W. and L.E. Sommers. 1996. Total carbon, organic carbon, and organic matter. p. 961-1010. 
In D.L Sparks et al. (eds.) Methods of soil analysis. Part 3. Chemical Methods. SSSA Book Series No. 
5, SSSA and ASA, Madison, WI. 
 
U.S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency.  1980a.  Title  40.  Protection  of  Environment.  Part  261–
Identification and Listing of Hazardous Wastes. Revised as of 1 July 2004.U.S. Gov. Print. Office, 
Washington, DC. 
 
U.S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency.  1980b.  Title  40.  Protection  of  Environment.  Part  262—
Standards applicable to generators of hazardous wastes. Revised as of 1 July 2003. U.S. Gov. Print. 
Office, Washington, DC. 
 
Walkley, A. and I.A. Black. 1934. An examination of the Degtjareff method for determining soil organic 
matter, and a proposed modification of the chromic acid titration method. Soil Sci.37:29-38 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 8 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
8 

   
Soil Organic Carbon (OC) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 Linked SOPs 
   
SOP Code  SOP Function 
EU_TRUE_SOP_025  Soil nutrient analyses 
 
4 Disclaimer 
 
The information presented here has been thoroughly researched and is believed to be accurate and 
correct.  However, the authors cannot be held legally responsible for any errors. There are no 
warranties, expressed or implied, made with respect to the information provided.  The authors will 
not be liable for any direct, indirect, special, incidental or consequential damages arising out of the 
use or inability to use the content of this publication.  
 
5 Copyright 
 
© All rights reserved.  Reproduction and dissemination of material presented here for research, 
educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorised without any prior written permission 
from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged.  Reproduction of material for 
sale or other commercial purposes is prohibited. 
 
6 Citation 
 
Please cite this report as follows:  
 
Karavidas I., Ntatsi G., Savvas D. (2018). Standard Operating Procedure 26: Measuring Soil Organic 
Carbon (OC). Developed by the EU-H2020 project TRUE (‘Transition paths to sustainable legume-
based systems in Europe’), funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation 
programme under Grant Agreement Number 727973. 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 9 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
9 

| SOP Code        | SOP Function           |
|:----------------|:-----------------------|
| EU_TRUE_SOP_025 | Soil nutrient analyses |