 
 
 
Academic personal branding: your 
‘research persona’  
 
 
   

Academic ‘research persona’ worksheet 
Your ‘research persona’ is a personal brand that provides a clear impression of how you want to be seen as a scientist. 
A well-defined ‘research persona’ can make you and your application stand out and can help people envisage you as 
a future colleague, particularly at the group leader level.  
 
We highly recommend reading this blog-post from Jordan Ward, a PI at UC Santa Cruz, that clearly defines this concept, 
and explains how he developed a brand while planning for faculty applications: 
 
Your research persona can include: 
•  A clear statement of your research interests that is narrow enough to differentiate you from others, but broad 
enough that it is understandable and interesting to those outside your subfield.  
•  Things that you find important as a scientist. For those actively applying for PI roles or who are about to 
establish a group, you might - for example - want to reflect on how you will lead your group or contribute to 
your institution/field. 
 
Ideally, your persona will be: 
•  Focussed; people will only remember a few things about you – by focussing on a few key aspects and 
consistently (but subtly!) communicating / reflecting these in the things you do, people are more likely to 
remember these specific points and form a clear (if incomplete) picture of you as a scientist. 
•  Specific to you: ideally, a scientist should be able to recall your brand e.g. ‘I spoke with a postdoc at [your 
institute] who works on … and is interested in …’ and someone else who has interacted with you will know 
immediately that they are referring to you. If your brand could apply to every postdoc at your institute, this will 
be harder to achieve. 
•  Communicated consistently across multiple channels – the key points of your persona should be reflected in 
your job application materials, your online presence, any talks you give, and your interactions with people. 
•  Genuine and authentic – if the persona you communicate does not match up with your actual personality and 
the things you have done, it will not be effective.  
 
To help you develop and communicate your research persona, we include some exercises below that draw on a 
published method1, developed for academic clinicians.  
 
   
 
1 Knowing Your Personal Brand: What Academics Can Learn From Marketing 101 
Borman-Shoap, Emily MD; Li, Su-Ting T. MD, MPH; St Clair, Nicole E. MD; Rosenbluth, Glenn MD; Pitt, Susan; Pitt, Michael B. MD 
Academic Medicine 94(9):p 1293-1298, September 2019. | DOI: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000002737 

 
 
 
 
 
Step 1. Self-reflection 
First consider what you *could* include in your current brand. 
1a. What experiences have been important to your career to date (degrees, mentors, exchanges or other experiences).  
 
1b. What other activities are you involved in outside lab?  Other particular scientific or societal issues that you are 
engaged in? How do you spend your free time? 
 
1c. What (broad / specific) research areas have your worked on to-date? What are your main areas of technical 
expertise and scientific knowledge?  
 
 
1d. What FIVE accomplishments to-date are you most proud of, and why?  
Accomplishment  Reason 
   
   
   
   
   
 
Step 2. Looking forward 
The main focus of your brand will be communicating yourself as a future colleague.  
2a. What are the specific biological questions you would like to answer as a PI? Can you summarise this in one or two 
bullet points?  
 
 
2b. Thinking about your future lab, what kind of culture would you want to foster in your research group? How do you 
envisage yourself as a PI – what topics or themes will be important to you? 
   
 
   
EMBL Fellows’ Career Service Handout: Academic personal branding - your ‘research persona’   Page 3/8  
Last update November 2024 
 

| Accomplishment   | Reason   |
|:-----------------|:---------|
|                  |          |
|                  |          |
|                  |          |
|                  |          |
|                  |          |

 
 
 
 
 
Step 3. Refining your brand 
A memorable brand is focused and authentic. It should be consistent with the impression people receive when they 
meet you (online or in-person), or when they read your CV.  
Go back through your answers to step 1-2, and consider: 
•  are there any common themes running through your past and future work (e.g. types of research questions, 
or approaches to answer those questions)? 
•  what has been the driving force motivating your research ? 
•  what would you like others to remember about who you are as a scientist? 
•  what is absolutely essential to understand who you are as a scientist? 
•  how can you make your focus / niche within your field clear, while keeping the  description short and 
understandable to people outside your field? 
•  what aspects do you think would be most interesting to your target audience? 
•  which aspects will most help you standout (e.g. as they are uncommon or sought-after)? 
•  what is not essential – what, when deleted, does not change the impact or impression of your brand?  
 
If possible, ask for feedback from others on what they perceive your strengths and interests are, and whether this 
matches the points you identified. 
Step 4. Communicate your brand 
Develop a short summary (‘elevator pitch’) of your brand that you can quickly adapt / use in different situations. 
Example: 
o  I am a cell biologist who uses ___ approach to understand ____. During my postdoc at EMBL, I have 
established a method ___, which enabled us to ____. I’m also an open science advocate, and am an 
early career board member for ASAPbio. 
 
•  Ensure that your brand comes across in: 
o  Your online presence 
▪  If you have twitter/X – try to incorporate the brand in your bio, and in what you choose to 
tweet/re-tweet about. 
▪  If you have a personal website, include your elevator pitch  – or expand this into a full 
biography that emphasises the key aspects of your brand (see appendix overleaf for help 
writing a bio). 
o  Talks you give: 
▪  Start your talk with a one-sentence intro that incorporates your research interests ‘e.g. My 
research interests are in….. . Today, I will talk about my postdoc work on….’ 
▪  Consider how to reflect the other aspects of your brand. For example, if part of your brand 
focuses on your commitment to mentoring, make sure to mention any students who were 
involved in your projects. 
o  Your interactions with people 
▪  Prepare a short elevator pitch to introduce yourself when you attend conference networking 
sessions and other events. 
▪  Get comfortable asking questions about topics that interest you. 
o  Your application materials 
▪  The key points of your brand should be emphasised in your coverletter, and your CV and 
research statement should also reflect these points. 
 
   
EMBL Fellows’ Career Service Handout: Academic personal branding - your ‘research persona’   Page 4/8  
Last update November 2024 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
A personal brand is what people remember about you. Their impression is influenced by multiple things: 
 
What you say
How you say 
What others 
it
say about you
The actions 
Who you are  
you’ve taken 
associated 
(that they 
with
know about)
Visual clues - what 
you wear, how your 
slides look
 
 
Visual clues can also support the memorability of your brand and research persona. Visual components could include 
a consistent colour scheme, something visual that you always where (for example, a piece of jewellery that links to 
your research topic) or something else (e.g. one of our webinar speakers mentioned she often uses cats on your slides). 
Working on the visual branding in your communications is an optional extra, that can be particularly effective for 
 
people who enjoy and are good at design.
 
 
   
 
   
EMBL Fellows’ Career Service Handout: Academic personal branding - your ‘research persona’   Page 5/8  
Last update November 2024 
 

 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX. Writing a biography 
If you will establish a website to support your application materials, you may want to include a biography. 
Consider: 
-  Seeking inspiration by looking for biographies of your scientific role models on their academic websites 
or conference programmes. 
-  Combining different building blocks to make your own structure that matches your brand, audience, and 
platform. 
Example building blocks (can be combined in different orders & you do not need to include all of them!) 
Intro 
Building block  Example(s) 
Introduction  I am a postdoc in xxx lab 
1-sentence on your current role – note that you  I am a genomics researcher 
can choose how to define yourself. 
Past experience 
Building block  Example(s) 
Academic training overview  “I obtained my PhD in Bioinformatics from the University of 
Salzburg  on  machine  learning  models  for  genomics  data 
•  Short  summary  of  academic  training  – 
analysis.” 
normally  mentions  institutions,  may  also 
include subject areas, dates & supervisors.   
Summary of experience / accomplishments  “During my postdoc, I developed an improved method for the 
analysis  of  cell  surface  composition  and  identified  Gros,  a 
•  For  academic  research  profiles:  a 
negative regulator of mTOR, as a novel marker of pancreatic 
narrative or (rarer) bullet points outlining 
stem cells.” 
key research accomplishments 
Interests 
Building block  Example(s) 
Short professional interests statement  “My current work focuses on understanding the biophysics and 
dynamics of vesicle trafficking, and how this is modified in 
•  1-2 sentences that summarize your research 
response to cellular stress.” 
interests 
   
“I develop and apply Bayesian models and scalable inference 
methods to biology”  
 
   
EMBL Fellows’ Career Service Handout: Academic personal branding - your ‘research persona’   Page 6/8  
Last update November 2024 
 

|                                                 | Example building blocks (can be combined in different orders & you do not need to include all of them!)   | None   | None                                                         | None       |    |
|:------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------|:-------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------|:---|
|                                                 | Intro                                                                                                     |        |                                                              |            |    |
|                                                 | Building block                                                                                            |        |                                                              | Example(s) |    |
| Introduction                                    |                                                                                                           |        | I am a postdoc in xxx lab                                    |            |    |
| 1-sentence on your current role – note that you |                                                                                                           |        | I am a genomics researcher                                   |            |    |
| can choose how to define yourself.              |                                                                                                           |        |                                                              |            |    |
|                                                 | Past experience                                                                                           |        |                                                              |            |    |
|                                                 | Building block                                                                                            |        |                                                              | Example(s) |    |
| Academic training overview                      |                                                                                                           |        | “I obtained my PhD in Bioinformatics from the University of  |            |    |
| • Short summary of academic training –          |                                                                                                           |        | Salzburg on machine learning models for genomics data        |            |    |
| normally mentions institutions, may also        |                                                                                                           |        | analysis.”                                                   |            |    |
| include subject areas, dates & supervisors.     |                                                                                                           |        |                                                              |            |    |
| Summary of experience / accomplishments         |                                                                                                           |        | “During my postdoc, I developed an improved method for the   |            |    |
| • For academic research profiles: a             |                                                                                                           |        | analysis of cell surface composition and identified Gros, a  |            |    |
| narrative or (rarer) bullet points outlining    |                                                                                                           |        | negative regulator of mTOR, as a novel marker of pancreatic  |            |    |
| key research accomplishments                    |                                                                                                           |        | stem cells.”                                                 |            |    |
|                                                 | Interests                                                                                                 |        |                                                              |            |    |
|                                                 | Building block                                                                                            |        |                                                              | Example(s) |    |
| Short professional interests statement          |                                                                                                           |        | “My current work focuses on understanding the biophysics and |            |    |
| • 1-2 sentences that summarize your research    |                                                                                                           |        | dynamics of vesicle trafficking, and how this is modified in |            |    |
| interests                                       |                                                                                                           |        | response to cellular stress.”                                |            |    |
|                                                 |                                                                                                           |        | “I develop and apply Bayesian models and scalable inference  |            |    |
|                                                 |                                                                                                           |        | methods to biology”                                          |            |    |

 
 
 
 
 
Continued overleaf... 
Longer  description  of  current  research  focus  1.  Many long non-coding RNAs form triplex structures with DNA 
(possibly including techniques)  and recruit chromatin modifiers to specific loci. Conserved 
RNA pseudoknots are implicated in this process. However, 
 
the  molecular  mechanisms  driving  these  interactions  are 
•  The first example uses the ‘ABT’ technique (:   poorly  understood.  Therefore,  our  group  combines  a 
o  We  know  a  something  about  multiomics  approach  with  atomic  force  microscopy 
lcRNAs  AND  what  seems  to  be  techniques to understand the role of pseudoknots in lncRNA 
important for their function. BUT  function. 
we have no idea how this works   
2.  Our research aims to elucidate the critical structural elements 
THEREFORE we investigate this. 
in  lncRNA  function.  In  particular,  we  are  interested  in 
 
pseudoknots,  a  conserved  element  in  many  lncRNAs, 
•  The second gives a background and then 
including  the  tumour  suppressor  MEG3.  This  work  will 
has the ‘why’ 
contribute to our understanding of how lncRNAs contribute to 
 
spatial control of gene expression during development. 
•  And the third is short and to the point.   
3.  My  research  aims  to  uncover  the  structural  elements 
 
essential for lncRNA function, using multiomics approaches 
Which structure do you prefer?  and atomic force microscopy. 
   
Acknowledgements:  these  texts  were  written  with  the  assistance  of 
ChatGTP. 
Summary of ‘service’ & non-research interests  •  I review for / am active member of the Society of xxx. 
•  My other interests include.. 
•  In parallel to my research activity, I apply my passion 
for art to support science communication. Here it is 
a portfolio of my scientific illustrations: 
Personality + drive 
Building block  Example(s) 
Story telling: your driving motivation  Since  falling  in  love  with  live  cell  imaging  during  my 
undergraduate thesis, I have worked in projects spanning 
immunology to neurosciences. A common theme to my work 
has  been  applying  advanced  microscopy  techniques  to 
answer fundamental biological questions. 
o  Examples of different building blocks can be found on the following pages 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
EMBL Fellows’ Career Service Handout: Academic personal branding - your ‘research persona’   Page 7/8  
Last update November 2024 
 

| CLoonngtienru edde osvcerirpletiaofn.. . of current research focus   | None                | None   | 1. Many long non-coding RNAs form triplex structures with DNA        | None       | None   |
| (possibly including techniques)                                      |                     |        | and recruit chromatin modifiers to specific loci. Conserved          |            |        |
| • The first example uses the ‘ABT’ technique (:                      |                     |        | RNA pseudoknots are implicated in this process. However,             |            |        |
| o We know a something about                                          |                     |        | the molecular mechanisms driving these interactions are              |            |        |
| lcRNAs AND what seems to be                                          |                     |        | poorly understood. Therefore, our group combines a                   |            |        |
| important for their function. BUT                                    |                     |        | multiomics approach with atomic force microscopy                     |            |        |
| we have no idea how this works                                       |                     |        | techniques to understand the role of pseudoknots in lncRNA           |            |        |
| THEREFORE we investigate this.                                       |                     |        | function.                                                            |            |        |
| • The second gives a background and then                             |                     |        | 2. Our research aims to elucidate the critical structural elements   |            |        |
| has the ‘why’                                                        |                     |        | in lncRNA function. In particular, we are interested in              |            |        |
| • And the third is short and to the point.                           |                     |        | pseudoknots, a conserved element in many lncRNAs,                    |            |        |
| Which structure do you prefer?                                       |                     |        | including the tumour suppressor MEG3. This work will                 |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | contribute to our understanding of how lncRNAs contribute to         |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | spatial control of gene expression during development.               |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | 3. My research aims to uncover the structural elements               |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | essential for lncRNA function, using multiomics approaches           |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | and atomic force microscopy.                                         |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | Acknowledgements: these texts were written with the assistance of    |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | ChatGTP.                                                             |            |        |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------|:-------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------|:-------|
| Summary of ‘service’ & non-research interests                        |                     |        | • I review for / am active member of the Society of xxx.             |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | • My other interests include..                                       |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | • In parallel to my research activity, I apply my passion            |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | for art to support science communication. Here it is                 |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | a portfolio of my scientific illustrations:                          |            |        |
|                                                                      | Personality + drive |        |                                                                      |            |        |
|                                                                      | Building block      |        |                                                                      | Example(s) |        |
| Story telling: your driving motivation                               |                     |        | Since falling in love with live cell imaging during my               |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | undergraduate thesis, I have worked in projects spanning             |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | immunology to neurosciences. A common theme to my work               |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | has been applying advanced microscopy techniques to                  |            |        |
|                                                                      |                     |        | answer fundamental biological questions.                             |            |        |

 
 
 
 
 
Imprint 
Document authors:  
Rachel Coulthard-Graf and Patricia Cabezas 
EMBL Fellows’ Career Service 
EMBL  
Meyerhofstr. 1 
69117 Germany 
Email: fellows_careers@embl.org 
V1.0.0: November 2024  
 
 
This handout is part of our career exploration materials, available from: 
https://www.embl.org/about/info/embl-fellows-career-service/info-resources/exploration/pi/  
 
The DOI for this document is: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14017535  
The most recent version is available from: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14017534 
Licensing 
 
Our materials are licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 
International license except where further licensing details are provided.  
 
 
Acknowledgements 
The EMBL Fellows' Career Service incorporates the EMBL Interdisciplinary Postdoc (EIPOD) career 
development programme. EI3POD and EIPOD4 have received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 
2020 research and innovation programme under Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreements 664726 
(2015-2020) and 847543 (2019-present) respectively 
 
 
   
EMBL Fellows’ Career Service Handout: Academic personal branding - your ‘research persona’   Page 8/8  
Last update November 2024 
 