Expressive Body Capture: 3D Hands, Face, and Body from a Single Image
[Project Page] [Paper] [Supp. Mat.]
Table of Contents
• License
• Description
– Fitting
– Different Body Models
– Visualizing Results
• Dependencies
• Citation
• Acknowledgments
• Contact
1

License
SoftwareCopyrightLicensefornon‑commercialscientificresearchpurposes. Pleasereadcarefully
thetermsandconditionsandanyaccompanyingdocumentationbeforeyoudownloadand/orusethe
SMPL‑X/SMPLify‑X model, data and software, (the “Model & Software”), including 3D meshes, blend
weights, blend shapes, textures, software, scripts, and animations. By downloading and/or using the
Model & Software(including downloading, cloning, installing, and any otheruse of this github reposi‑
tory), you acknowledge that you have read these terms and conditions, understand them, and agree
to be bound by them. If you do not agree with these terms and conditions, you must not download
and/or use the Model & Software. Any infringement of the terms of this agreement will automatically
terminate your rights under this License.
Disclaimer
The original images used for the figures 1 and 2 of the paper can be found in this link. The images
in the paper are used under license from gettyimages.com. We have acquired the right to use them
in the publication, but redistribution is not allowed. Please follow the instructions on the given link
to acquire right of usage. Our results are obtained on the 483 × 724 pixels resolution of the original
images.
Description
This repository contains the fitting code used for the experiments in Expressive Body Capture: 3D
Hands, Face, and Body from a Single Image.
Fitting
Run the following command to execute the code:
1 python smplifyx/main.py --config cfg_files/fit_smplx.yaml
2 --data_folder DATA_FOLDER
3 --output_folder OUTPUT_FOLDER
4 --visualize="True/False"
5 --model_folder MODEL_FOLDER
6 --vposer_ckpt VPOSER_FOLDER
7 --part_segm_fn smplx_parts_segm.pkl
wheretheDATA_FOLDERshouldcontaintwosubfolders,images,wheretheimagesarelocated,and
keypoints, where the OpenPose output should be stored.
2

| 1 python smplifyx/main.py --config cfg_files/fit_smplx.yaml   |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2 --data_folder DATA_FOLDER                                   |
| 3 --output_folder OUTPUT_FOLDER                               |
| 4 --visualize="True/False"                                    |
| 5 --model_folder MODEL_FOLDER                                 |
| 6 --vposer_ckpt VPOSER_FOLDER                                 |
| 7 --part_segm_fn smplx_parts_segm.pkl                         |

Different Body Models
TofitSMPLorSMPL+H,replacetheyamlconfigurationfilewitheitherfit_smpl.yamlorfit_smplx.yaml,
i.e.: * for SMPL: Shell python smplifyx/main.py --config cfg_files/fit_smpl
.yaml --data_folder DATA_FOLDER --output_folder OUTPUT_FOLDER --
visualize="True/False"--model_folder MODEL_FOLDER --vposer_ckpt
VPOSER_FOLDER * for SMPL+H: Shell python smplifyx/main.py --config
cfg_files/fit_smplh.yaml --data_folder DATA_FOLDER --output_folder
OUTPUT_FOLDER --visualize="True/False"--model_folder MODEL_FOLDER --
vposer_ckpt VPOSER_FOLDER
Visualizing Results
To visualize the results produced by the method you can run the following script:
1 python smplifyx/render_results.py --mesh_fns OUTPUT_MESH_FOLDER
where OUTPUT_MESH_FOLDER is the folder that contains the resulting meshes.
Dependencies
Follow the installation instructions for each of the following before using the fitting code.
1. PyTorch
2. SMPL‑X
3. VPoser
4. Homogenus
Optional Dependencies
1. PyTorch Mesh self‑intersection for interpenetration penalty
• Download the per‑triangle part segmentation: smplx_parts_segm.pkl (ctrl/cmd +F for the
filename)
2. Trimesh for loading triangular meshes
3. Pyrender for visualization
ThecodehasbeentestedwithPython3.6, CUDA10.0, CuDNN7.3andPyTorch1.0onUbuntu18.04.
3

Citation
If you find this Model & Software useful in your research we would kindly ask you to cite:
1 @inproceedings{SMPL-X:2019,
2 title = {Expressive Body Capture: 3D Hands, Face, and Body from a
Single Image},
3 author = {Pavlakos, Georgios and Choutas, Vasileios and Ghorbani,
Nima and Bolkart, Timo and Osman, Ahmed A. A. and Tzionas,
Dimitrios and Black, Michael J.},
4 booktitle = {Proceedings IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR)},
5 year = {2019}
6 }
Acknowledgments
LBFGS with Strong Wolfe Line Search
The LBFGS optimizer with Strong Wolfe Line search is taken from this Pytorch pull request. Special
thanks to Du Phan for implementing this. We will update the repository once the pull request is
merged.
Contact
The code of this repository was implemented by Vassilis Choutas and Georgios Pavlakos.
For questions, please contact smplx@tue.mpg.de.
For commercial licensing (and all related questions for business applications), please contact ps‑lice
nsing@tue.mpg.de.
4

| 1 @inproceedings{SMPL-X:2019,                                        |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2 title = {Expressive Body Capture: 3D Hands, Face, and Body from a  |
| Single Image},                                                       |
| 3 author = {Pavlakos, Georgios and Choutas, Vasileios and Ghorbani,  |
| Nima and Bolkart, Timo and Osman, Ahmed A. A. and Tzionas,           |
| Dimitrios and Black, Michael J.},                                    |
| 4 booktitle = {Proceedings IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern |
| Recognition (CVPR)},                                                 |
| 5 year = {2019}                                                      |
| 6 }                                                                  |