A mixed lepto-hadronic scenario for
PKS 2155-304
M.Cerruti∗, A.Zech∗, C.Boisson∗ and S.Inoue†
2102 tcO 91  ]EH.hp-ortsa[  2v4205.0121:viXra ∗LUTH, Observatoire de Paris, CNRS, Université Paris Diderot; 5 Place Jules Janssen, 92190
Meudon, France
†Institute for Cosmic Ray Research, University of Tokyo, Kashiwa, Japan
Abstract. The models developed to describe the spectral energy distribution (SED) of blazars
can be divided into leptonic or hadronic scenarios, according to the particles responsible for the
high-energy component. We have developed a new stationary code which computes all the relevant
leptonic and hadronic processes, permitting the study of both leptonic and hadronic scenarios in a
consistent way. Interestingly, mixed lepto-hadronic scenarios (in which both components contribute
to the high energy emission) naturally arise in this framework. We present the first application to
the well known BL Lac object PKS 2155-304.
Keywords: blazars, γ-rays, hadronic models
PACS: 98.54.Cm
INTRODUCTION
In the framework of the unified active galactic nuclei (AGN) model, blazars are con-
sidered as radio-loud AGN whose relativistic jet is pointed close to the line-of-sight
[1]. Their SED is characterised by two bumps, one peaking at low energies (infrared to
X-rays), the other in γ-rays. While the first component is unanimously ascribed to syn-
chrotron emission by a non-thermal population of electrons and positrons, the origin of
the second component is still under discussion. In leptonic models it is ascribed to an
inverse Compton process between the electrons and a low energy photon field (their own
synchrotron emission, or external photons), while in hadronic models it originates from
synchrotron emission by protons and secondary particles coming from p-γ interactions.
We have developed a new stationary lepto-hadronic code which describes all the rele-
vant process, permitting the study of both scenarios in a consistent framework, as well
as interesting mixed lepto-hadronic scenarios. We first provide the details of the code,
and we then present an application to the BL Lac object PKS 2155-304.
DESCRIPTION OF THE CODE
The code we present is a direct evolution of the code developped by Katarzyn´ski et al.
[2] Several modifications and improvements have been applied to the original leptonic
code: more details can be found in [3].
The emitting region is assumed to be filled with a stationary population of relativistic
electrons/positrons and protons. The proton energy distribution N (γ ) is described by a
p p

power-law function with index α , defined above γ and with an exponential cut-off
p p;min
at γ .
p;Max
The proton population in the emitting region interacts with the low energy photons
through the photo-meson process and the electron-positron pair production (Bethe-
Heitler process). The photo-meson interaction is evaluated using the publicly available
Monte-Carlo code SOPHIA [4] which gives as output the distributions of the stable
particles produced in the interaction. The low-energy photon field is represented by the
synchrotron emission from the primary electron population in the jet, which represents
by far the dominant component at low energies for high-frequency-peaked BL Lac
objects as PKS 2155-304. The most important features of the computation of hadronic
processes are the following:
• We first compute the synchrotron emission by protons.
• Before calling SOPHIA, the energy of the proton is modified in order to take into
account the synchrotron losses following Mücke and Protheroe [5].
• Photons coming from the π0 decay and the synchrotron emission from e± coming
±
from the π channel can trigger an electro-magnetic cascade, supported by syn-
chrotron emission. The stationary state of the cascade emission has been evaluated
iteratively computing for each generation the stationary distribution of pairs and
the associated synchrotron emission.
• Within SOPHIA, we corrected for synchrotron losses the energy of kaons, pions
and muons before decay.
• Within SOPHIA, we retrieved the muon (µ± ) spectra before their decay into elec-
trons and positrons. The stationary spectrum is computed taking into account both
decay and synchrotron cooling, and their synchrotron emission is then evaluated.
We consider that the proton index is equal to the electron index before the break (under
the assumption that the acceleration mechanism is similar), and we fix the maximum
proton energy through a comparison between acceleration and cooling time-scale (see
Mücke and Protheroe [5]). With respect to a pure leptonic model, we add then only one
free parameter in the code, the proton normalization factor.
MODELLING OF PKS 2155-304
As a first application we study the BL Lac object PKS 2155-304, using in particular the
data from the multiwavelength campaign of 2008 [6], in which the source was found to
be in a low flux state.
We model the source in four different scenarios, shown in Fig. 1 (the corresponding
model parameters are given in Table 1): a standard synchrotron-self-Compton model,
a hadronic model and two different lepto-hadronic models. The Doppler factor of the
emitting region has been fixed at 30 for all the models. For the SSC model we adopted
a low magnetic field (B = 65 mG), and a relatively large emitting region (R ≈ 1016cm).
In the hadronic model, in order to have a significant synchrotron emission from the
protons, we need to increase the magnetic field up to 80 G, reducing the emitting
region by two order of magnitudes (R ≈ 1014 cm) in order to fit the low energy bump

FIGURE 1. Top left: modelling of PKS 2155-304 in a synchrotron-self-Compton scenario. Top right:
modelling of PKS 2155-304 in a hadronic scenario. Bottom: modelling of PKS 2155-304 in a lepto-
hadronic scenario. The colour-code is as follow: red-primary electron synchrotron emission; green-inverse
Compton emission; blue-proton synchrotron emission; light blue-muon synchrotron emission; yellow-
photons from π0 decay; pink-synchrotron emission from secondary e± coming from π± decay. The
emission from the associated electro-magnetic cascade is shown by the dotted curves (same colour).
with the primary electron synchrotron emission. Interestingly, the synchrotron emission
from secondary particles (µ and cascades associated with γ and e± ) coming from p-γ
interactions significantly contributes to the high-energy bump.
The first lepto-hadronic model uses the same parameters that were adopted for the SSC
model, but we add protons in the emitting region. Given the low magnetic field, they
do not contribute directly to the SED, but the emission from secondary pairs can play
a role in the TeV energy range (in this case the power of the emitting region increases,
reaching the Eddington luminosity of the source). The second lepto-hadronic model lies
in between the SSC and the hadronic one, with a magnetic field of 5 G. In this case the
SSC component dominates only up to a few 10 GeV energies, while at higher energies
the synchrotron emission by secondary pairs becomes the dominant process. In this case
the Fermi and H.E.S.S. data would then be ascribed to two different processes.
An interesting result is that the presence of hadrons affects the γ-ray emission, inducing
a hardening of the TeV spectrum (that can be seen in both the hadronic model and the
first lepto-hadronic model). This effect can be tested by the next-generation Cherenkov
telescope CTA. Another important feature is that the cascade component tends to fill
the gap between the two bumps much more than in pure SSC models. The upcoming
hard-X-ray satellites NuSTAR and Astro-H will put new constraints on this part of the
spectrum.

TABLE 1. Parameters used for the SSC and the hadronic modelling
of PKS 2155-304. The luminosity of the source has been calculated as
L = πR2 cΓ2 (u +u +u ). For the SSC scenario, we included the
jet src bulk B e p
term u , which represents the contribution of cold protons in the
p,cold
emitting region, estimated following Sikora et al. [7].
SSC Hadronic Mixed 1 Mixed 2
θ 1◦ 1◦ 1◦ 1◦
δ 30 30 30 30
Γ 16 16 16 16
bulk
γ 5×102 1 5×102 1×102
e,min
γ 1.5×105 4×103 1.5×105 1.7×104
e,break
γ 3×106 6×104 2.5×106 3×105
e,max
α 2.4 2.0 2.4 2.0
e,1
α 4.32 4.32 4.32 4.32
e,2
-3
K [cm ] 7.5×104 6.0×102 6.3×104 6×105
e
u [erg cm-3 ] 5.9×10−3 2.2×10−3 5.1×10−3 1.4
e
γ - 1 105 1
p,min
γ - 1×109 8×107 6×107
p,max
α - 2.0 2.4 2.0
p
η = K /K - 20 10 1.0
p e
-3
u [erg cm ] - 3.7×102 22 1.6×104
p
R [cm] 1.7×1016 5.2×1014 1.8×1016 2×1014
src
B [G] 0.065 80 0.065 5
u [erg cm-3 ] 1.7×10−4 2.5×102 1.7×10−4 1.0
B
u /u 35 8.5×10−6 29 1.4
e B
u /u - 1.5 1.3×105 1.6×104
p B
-1
L [erg s ] 4.3×1043 4.2×1045 1.7×1047 1.5×1046
jet
REFERENCES
1. C. M. Urry, and P. Padovani, PASP 107, 803 (1995), arXiv:astro-ph/9506063.
2. K. Katarzyn´ski, H. Sol, and A. Kus, A&AP 367, 809–825 (2001).
3. M. Cerruti, A. Zech, C. Boisson, and S. Inoue, “Lepto-hadronic modelling of blazar emission,” in
SF2A-2011: Proceedings of the Annual meeting of the French Society of Astronomy and Astrophysics,
edited by G. Alecian, K. Belkacem, R. Samadi, and D. Valls-Gabaud, 2011, pp. 555–558, 1111.
0557.
4. A. Mücke, R. Engel, J. P. Rachen, R. J. Protheroe, and T. Stanev, Computer Physics Communications
124, 290–314 (2000), arXiv:astro-ph/9903478.
5. A. Mücke, and R. J. Protheroe, Astroparticle Physics 15, 121–136 (2001), arXiv:astro-ph/
0004052.
6. F. Aharonian, A. G. Akhperjanian, G. Anton, U. Barres de Almeida, A. R. Bazer-Bachi, Y. Becherini,
B. Behera, K. Bernlöhr, C. Boisson, A. Bochow, and et al., ApJL 696, L150–L155 (2009), 0903.
2924.
7. M. Sikora, Ł. Stawarz, R. Moderski, K. Nalewajko, and G. M. Madejski, ApJ 704, 38–50 (2009),
0904.1414.