Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 1
How to understand the cell by breaking it: network analysis of
gene perturbation screens
Florian Markowetz∗
Cancer Research UK Cambridge Research Institute, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK
∗ florian.markowetz@cancer.org.uk
Abstract
9002 voN 62  ]NM.oib-q[  2v8392.0190:viXra
Modern high-throughput gene perturbation screens are key technologies at the forefront of genetic re-
search. Combined with rich phenotypic descriptors they enable researchers to observe detailed cellular
reactions to experimental perturbations on a genome-wide scale. This review surveys the current state-
of-the-art in analyzing single gene perturbation screens from a network point of view. We describe
approaches to make the step from the parts list to the wiring diagram by using phenotypes for network
inference and integrating them with complementary data sources. The first part of the review describes
methods to analyze one- or low-dimensional phenotypes like viability or reporter activity; the second part
concentrates on high-dimensional phenotypes showing global changes in cell morphology, transcriptome
or proteome.
Introduction
Functional genomics has demonstrated considerable success in inferring the inner working of a cell through
analysis of its response to various perturbations. In recent years several technological advances have
pushed gene perturbation screens to the forefront of functional genomics. Most importantly, modern
technologies make it possible to probe gene function on a genome-wide scale in many model organisms
and human. For example, large collections of knock-out mutants play a prominent role in the study of
S. cerevisiae [1] and RNA interference (RNAi) has become a widely used high-throughput method to
knock-down target genes in a wide range of organisms, including Drosophila melanogaster, C. elegans,
and human [2–4].
Another major advance is the development of rich phenotypic descriptions by imaging or measuring
molecular features globally. Observed phenotypes can reveal which genes are essential for an organism, or
work in a particular pathway, or have a specific cellular function. Combining high-throughput screening
techniques with rich phenotypes enables researchers to observe detailed reactions to experimental pertur-
bations on a genome-wide scale. This makes gene perturbation screens one of the most promising tools
in functional genomics.
Advances in the design and analysis of gene perturbation screens may have an immediate impact on
many areas of biological and medical research. New screening and phenotyping techniques often directly
translate into new insights in gene and protein functions. Results of perturbation screens can also reveal
unexploited areas of potential therapeutic intervention. For example, a recent RNAi screen showed that
some of the most critical protein kinases for the proliferation and survival of cancer cell lines are also the
least studied [5].
A goal becoming more and more prominent in both experimental as well as computational research is
to leverage gene perturbation screens to the identification of molecular interactions, cellular pathways and
regulatory mechanisms. Research focus is shifting from understanding the phenotypes of single proteins
to understanding how proteins fulfill their function, what other proteins they interact with and where
they act in a pathway. Novel ideas on how to use perturbation screens to uncover cellular wiring diagrams
can lead to a better understanding of how cellular networks are de-regulated in diseases like cancer. This
knowledge is indispensable for finding new drug targets to attack the drivers of a disease and not only
the symptoms.

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 2
Phenotypes A phenotype can be any observable characteristic of an organism. Analysis strategies
strongly depend on how rich and informative phenotype descriptors are. We will call phenotypes resulting
from a single reporter (or a small number of reporters) low-dimensional phenotypes and the genes showing
significant results hits [6,7]. Examples of such low-dimensional phenotypes are cell viability versus cell
death [1], growth rates [8] or the activity of reporter constructs, e.g. a luciferase, downstream of a pathway
of interest [9]. Low-dimensional phenotyping screens can identify candidate genes on a genome-wide scale
and are often used as a first step for follow-up analysis. We will discuss methods to functionally interpret
hits from low-dimensional phenotyping screens and to place them in the context of cellular networks in
the first part of this review.
The second part will be devoted to high-dimensional phenotyping screens, which evaluate a large
number of cellular features at the same time. Observing system-wide changes promises key insights into
cellular mechanisms and pathways that can not be supplied by low-dimensional screens. For example,
high-dimensional phenotypes can include changes in cell morphology [10–13], or growth rates under a
wide range of conditions [14], or transcriptional changes measured on microarrays [15–18], or changes in
the metabolome and proteome [19] measured by mass spectrometry [20] or flow cytometry [21,22]. Mor-
phological and growth phenotypes can be obtained on a genome-wide scale [13,14], while transcriptional
and proteomic phenotypes are often restricted to individual pathways or processes [16,17,21].
The distinction between low- and high-dimensional phenotypes may sound technical, but it is crucial
for choosing potential analysis methods. The central difference is that high-dimensional phenotypes
allow to compute correlations and other similarity measures, which are not applicable for low-dimensional
phenotypes. Another important distinction is between static phenotypes, providing a ‘snapshot’ of a cell’s
reaction to a gene perturbation, and dynamic phenotypes showing a cell’s reaction over time. We expect
more and more studies in the future to produce dynamic output and in the following note explicitly which
methods can be applied to dynamic phenotypes. For the biological interpretation of screening results it is
very important to keep in mind which level of ‘cellular granularity’ a phenotype describes: growth rates
or cell morphologies are much more ‘high-level’ features of the cell than gene or protein expressions. As
soon as more studies produce dynamic phenotypes on many different cellular levels, integrative analysis of
inter-connected phenotypes [23] will become more important. In the following, however, we concentrate
on the current state-of-the art, which almost always uses a single type of readout in a perturbation screen.
Pre-processing pipeline In this review we focus on single gene perturbations by knockouts [1] or RNA
interference [4] that allow targeting individual genes or combinations of genes. Before network analysis,
the raw data needs to pass an initial analysis and quality control pipeline specific to the perturbation and
phenotyping technologies used. Low-dimensional screens are mostly performed in multiple-well-plates
and a typical analysis pipeline [4] includes data pre-processing, removal of spatial biases per plates,
normalization between plates, and finally detection of significant hits [6,7,24]. In vertebrates, genes need
to be targeted with multiple siRNAs to ensure effective down-regulation [4] and the multiple phenotypes
per gene can afterwards be integrated into a statistical score [25]. High-dimensional morphological screens
depend on computational analysis like image segmentation [26,27] and phenotype discovery [28–30] for
rapid and consistent phenotyping. Molecular high-dimensional phenotypes need pre-processing depending
on their platform and different approaches exist e.g. for flow-cytometry data [31] or microarrays [32].
From phenotypes to cellular networks The phenotypes we have discussed above allow only an
indirect view on how different genes in the same process interact to achieve a particular phenotype.
Cell morphology or sensitivity to stresses, for example, are global features of the cell and hard to relate
directly to how individual genes contribute to them (see Fig. 1a). Gene expression phenotypes show
transcriptional changes in the genes downstream of a perturbed pathway but offer only an indirect
view of pathway structure due to the high number of non-transcriptional regulatory events like protein
modifications [33]. For example, different protein activation states by phosphorylation may not be visible

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 3
by changes in mRNA concentrations (see Fig. 1b).
This gap between observed phenotypes and underlying cellular networks is the main problem in the
analysis of perturbation screens and applies to both low- and high-dimensional screens. The goal of
computational analysis is to bridge this gap by inferring gene function and recovering pathways and
mechanism from observed phenotypes. The following methods address the challenge in different ways,
mostly by integrating the perturbation effects and phenotypes with additional sources of information like
collections of functionally related gene sets or protein-interaction networks.
Network analysis of low-dimensional phenotypes
Global overview by enrichment analysis A simple way to link phenotypes to gene function is
to test whether pathways or functional groups of genes (e.g. defined by Gene Ontology terms [34] or
MSigDB [35]) are enriched in the list of hits. Most methods use a hypergeometric test statistic (see
Fig. 2a) and many can be used online [36–38] or as Bioconductor packages [39]. An alternative global
functional annotation method tests whether functional groups show a trend towards especially strong or
weak phenotypes without using a cutoff to define hits [35] (see Fig. 2b). Enrichment analysis can also
be very useful to analyze high-dimensional phenotypes, for example when functionally annotating the
results of a clustering method.
Enrichment analysis results in a list of p-values describing how significantly each gene set was repre-
sented in the hits. Enrichment analysis reduces complexity and improves interpretability of results by
moving from single genes to functionally related gene sets. This type of analysis is often called ’un-biased’
and ’hypothesis-free’ and is ideal for a comprehensive first overview. However, enrichment analysis loses
its value for complexity reduction if the number of gene sets becomes too big. Also, overlap and depen-
dencies between gene lists that could potentially bias the results have so far only been addressed for the
GO graph [38,39] but not for more general collections of gene lists like MSigDB [35].
Good data analysis asks specific questions. A hypothesis-free method can only be the very first
starting point for a deeper exploration of the data. For example, all enrichment methods rely on known
gene sets and cannot uncover new pathways or components. Enrichment methods treat pathways as bags
of unconnected genes without considering connections within and between pathways. Thus, enrichment
methods can only deliver a very crude picture of the cell. In the following we will discuss approaches
to overcome some of the limitations of enrichment analysis by integrating the observed phenotypes with
complementary sources of information.
Mapping phenotypes to networks Another valuable source of information to interpret RNAi hits
are gene and protein networks obtained either experimentally [40,41] or computationally by literature
mining [42] or integrating heterogeneous genomic data [43–45]. All computational networks are available
online on supplementary webpages and the experimental networks can be obtained from databases like
STRING [46] or BioGRID [47].
Using these complementary data sources can improve hit identification [48–50] and even provide a
more refined view of the pathways the hits contribute to. One strategy is to search for sub-networks
containing a surprisingly large number of hits (see Fig. 3a). While this strategy is already useful when
evaluating interesting sub-networks by eye [51,52] its true power comes from the availability of efficient
search algorithms to find sub-networks enriched for RNAi hits and assess their significance [53–57]. An
additional application of mapping hits to a network is that known phenotypes can be used to predict
phenotypes of genes not included in the screen, e.g. by assuming that a gene connected to many hits
should also show a strong phenotype [51]. The success of all network-mapping strategies strongly depends
on the quality and coverage of both the screen and the linkage in the network.

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 4
Gene prioritization Other approaches complement genomic data with biological prior knowledge
showing how ‘interesting’ hits look like. Gene prioritization [49,58] ranks genes according to how promising
they would be for follow-up studies. Because it uses prior knowledge to fine-tune the algorithm, gene
prioritization can be more focussed than a global un-informed search for enriched subnetworks.
Network analysis of high-dimensional phenotypes
Global overview by clustering and ranking. Most state-of-the-art analysis techniques rely on a
guilt-by-association paradigm: genes with similar phenotypes will most probably have a similar biological
function. This explains the prevalence of clustering techniques in analyzing high-dimensional phenotyping
screens [10,13,14,17]. Clustering is a convenient first analysis and visualization step that can can highlight
strong trends and patterns in the data and can thus yield a global first impression of functional units.
Another analysis strategy relying on guilt-by-association is to rank genes by their phenotypic similarity
compared to a gene of interest [11]. Clustering and ranking can be combined with enrichment analysis
(as discussed above) for functional interpretation.
Graph methods linking causes to effects Another useful data visualization especially for transcrip-
tional phenotypes is to build a directed (not necessarily acyclic) graph by drawing an arrow between two
genes if perturbing one results in a significant expression change at the other [59]. This graph representa-
tion can be then used as a starting point for further analysis, for example by using graph-theoretic methods
of transitive reduction [60] to distinguish between direct and indirect effects of a perturbation [61,62].
Probabilistic graphical models. Most approaches to infer pathway structure from experimental
data rely on probabilistic graphical models. For low-dimensional phenotypes they often suffer from non-
uniqueness and un-identifiability issues [63], but can be applied very successfully in high-dimensional set-
tings. A prominent approach are (static or dynamic) Bayesian networks, which describe probabilistically
how a gene is controlled by its regulators [64,65]. To model experimental perturbations most approaches
rely on the concept of ‘ideal interventions’ [66] which deterministically fix a target gene to a particular
state (e.g ‘0’ for a gene knockout). Ideal interventions were applied in Bayesian networks [21,67,68],
factor graphs [69] and dependency networks [70]. In simulations [71,72] and on real data [21,71] it was
found that interventions are critical for effective inference.
The model of ideal interventions contains a number of idealizations (hence the name), most impor-
tantly that manipulations only affect single genes and that perturbation strength can be controlled deter-
ministically. The first assumption may not be true if there are off-target or compensatory effects involving
other genes. The second assumption may also not hold true in realistic biological scenarios; in particular
for RNAi screens where experimentalists often lack knowledge about the exact knock-down efficiency.
Probabilistic generalizations of ideal interventions can be used to cope with this uncertainty [73].
Probabilistic data integration High-dimensional phenotypic profiles can be mapped to given graphs
and networks by finding subgraphs that are connected in the background network and at the same time
show high similarity of phenotypic profiles. These approaches already exist for mapping gene expression
data onto protein interaction networks [74] and the same algorithms could easily be applied to any other
kind of high-dimensional phenotypic profiles (see Fig. 3b). Other approaches use data integration to
construct potential pathways from protein interactions and transcription factor binding data to relate
perturbed genes to the observed downstream effects [75–77].
Multiple Input - Multiple Output (MIMO) models Many of the approaches discusses so far–
like clustering or graphical models–can be applied to both static ‘snapshots’ as well as dynamic time-
course measurements. Another approach to model specifically the dynamics of networks comes from a

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 5
branch of control theory called ‘systems identification’ [78] and uses so called Multiple Input - Multiple
Output (MIMO) models. MIMO models represent the evolution of a perturbed cell over time by linear
differential equations [79–83] and can represent non-linear effects by transfer functions [84]. The models
can be inferred by regression techniques in the linear case [80] or Monte Carlo stochastic search in the
non-linear case [84]. The framework is very flexible and can incorporated single as well as combinatorial
perturbations.
Nested Effects Models (NEMs) One of the key problems in analyzing perturbation screens is that
the observed phenotypes are downstream of the perturbed pathway and may not show the direct influence
of one pathway component on another. A class of models explicitly addressing this problem are Nested
Effects Models [33,85]. They reconstruct pathway structure from subset relations based on the following
rationale: Perturbing some genes may have an influence on a global process, while perturbing others
affects sub-processes of it. Imagine, for example, a signaling pathway activating several transcription
factors. Blocking the entire pathway will most probably affect all targets of all transcription factors,
while perturbing a single transcription factor will only affect its direct targets, which are a subset of the
phenotype obtained by blocking the complete pathway. Given high-dimensional phenotypes showing a
subset structure, NEMs find the most likely pathway topology explaining the data. They differ from other
statistical approaches like Bayesian networks by encoding subset relations instead of correlations or other
similarity measures. The theory of NEMs has been applied and extended in several studies [86–89]. An
implementation is available as an R/Bioconductor package [90]. Other extensions to the NEM framework
distinguish between activating and inhibiting regulation [91] or include dynamic information from time-
series measurements [92].
Discussion and Outlook
In this review we have discussed two main approaches to describe the reaction of a cell to an experimental
gene perturbation: low-dimensional phenotypes measure individual reporters for cell viability or pathway
activation, while high-dimensional phenotypes show global effects on cell morphology, transcriptome or
proteome. Table 1 lists examples of freely available software implementing some of these approaches.
All of them can be directly applied to gene perturbation screens, even though some of them have been
introduced in different contexts. While this review has focused on single gene knock-outs and knock-
downs, similar approaches can be applied to gene over-expression screens [22,83,93,94], drug treatment
[84], environmental stresses changing many genes [95,96] or even natural genetic variation [97].
Predicting phenotypes from metabolic networks The focus of this review is on functionally
annotating hits in a network context and reconstructing networks from high-dimensional phenotypes. In a
complementary direction of research, genome-wide reconstructions of metabolic networks [98,99] are used
to predict effects of gene perturbations. Instead of predicting networks from phenotypes, these approaches
predict phenotypes from networks. For example, in S. cerevisiae and E. coli computational models very
accurately predict fitness effects of gene knock-outs [100,101] as well as compensatory rescue effects [102].
However, recent developments in metabolic network modeling have led to linear programming algorithms
to extract relevant context-specific sub-networks of activity from a genome-wide network [103,104]. In
the same way as the probabilistic data integration methods discussed above, e.g. [74], these algorithms
could be used in the future to find metabolic sub-networks active under certain gene perturbations.
From single to combinatorial perturbations While single gene perturbation screens have been
immensely successful in extending our knowledge of pathway components and interactions, an important
limitation can be caused by compensatory effects, genetic buffering and redundancy of cellular mechanisms
and pathways [105, 106]. This can only be overcome by perturbing several genes at the same time.

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 6
The number of possible combinations grows rapidly and thus current approaches are mainly limited to
perturbing pairs of genes and observing low-dimensional phenotypes like fitness estimates [107]. The
analysis of combinatorial perturbations is the topic of another review [108].
The end of the screen is the beginning of the experiment Global phenotyping and pathway
screening can be combined in the same study. For example, a first genome-wide screen identifies key
genes representative for pathways and cellular mechanisms involved in the phenotype. In a second step
the hits of the first screen could be assayed for high-dimensional molecular phenotypes to infer a pathway
diagram using Nested Effects Models or other statistical approaches.
In a further step this preliminary pathway models could be used to plan an additional round of
experimentation. Different modeling frameworks propose future experiments to most effectively refine a
pathway hypothesis, e.g. Bayesian networks [109,110], physical network models [76], logical models [111],
Boolean networks [112], and dynamical modeling [79].
Iteratively integrating experimentation and computation may lead to a virtuous circle and is one of
the most promising approaches to refine our understanding of the inner working of the cell.
Acknowledgments
I thank the organizers of the ISMB 2009 tutorial sessions for the opportunity to present this review.
Yinyin Yuan, Roland Schwarz, Gregoire Pau provided helpful comments on drafts of the manuscript. My
research is funded by Cancer Research UK.
References
1. Winzeler EA, Shoemaker DD, Astromoff A, Liang H, Anderson K, et al. (1999) Functional char-
acterization of the S. cerevisiae genome by gene deletion and parallel analysis. Science 285:
901–906.
2. Fuchs F, Boutros M (2006) Cellular phenotyping by RNAi. Brief Funct Genomic Proteomic 5:
52–56.
3. Moffat J, Sabatini D (2006) Building mammalian signalling pathways with RNAi screens. Nature
Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 7: 177–187.
4. Boutros M, Ahringer J (2008) The art and design of genetic screens: RNA interference. Nat Rev
Genet 9: 554–566.
5. Luo B, Cheung H, Subramanian A, Sharifnia T, Okamoto M, et al. (2008) Highly parallel identi-
fication of essential genes in cancer cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 105: 20380–20385.
6. Boutros M, Br´as LP, Huber W (2006) Analysis of cell-based RNAi screens. Genome Biol 7: R66.
7. Rieber N, Knapp B, Eils R, Kaderali L (2009) RNAither, an automated pipeline for the statistical
analysis of high-throughput RNAi screens. Bioinformatics .
8. Giaever G, Chu AM, Ni L, Connelly C, Riles L, et al. (2002) Functional profiling of the saccha-
romyces cerevisiae genome. Nature 418: 387–391.
9. Mu¨ller P, Kuttenkeuler D, Gesellchen V, Zeidler MP, Boutros M (2005) Identification of
JAK/STAT signalling components by genome-wide RNA interference. Nature 436: 871–875.

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 7
10. Perlman ZE, Slack MD, Feng Y, Mitchison TJ, Wu LF, et al. (2004) Multidimensional drug
profiling by automated microscopy. Science 306: 1194–1198.
11. Gunsalus KC, Yueh WC, MacMenamin P, Piano F (2004) RNAiDB and PhenoBlast: web tools
for genome-wide phenotypic mapping projects. Nucleic acids research 32: D406–10.
12. Neumann B, Held M, Liebel U, Erfle H, Rogers P, et al. (2006) High-throughput RNAi screening
by time-lapse imaging of live human cells. Nature Methods 3: 385–390.
13. Bakal C, Aach J, Church G, Perrimon N (2007) Quantitative morphological signatures define local
signaling networks regulating cell morphology. Science 316: 1753–1756.
14. Brown JA, Sherlock G, Myers CL, Burrows NM, Deng C, et al. (2006) Global analysis of gene
function in yeast by quantitative phenotypic profiling. Mol Syst Biol 2: 2006.0001.
15. Hughes TR, Marton MJ, Jones AR, Roberts CJ, Stoughton R, et al. (2000) Functional discovery
via a compendium of expression profiles. Cell 102: 109–126.
16. Boutros M, Agaisse H, Perrimon N (2002) Sequential activation of signaling pathways during
innate immune responses in drosophila. Dev Cell 3: 711–722.
17. Ivanova N, Dobrin R, Lu R, Kotenko I, Levorse J, et al. (2006) Dissecting self-renewal in stem
cells with RNA interference. Nature 442: 533–533.
18. Amit I, Garber M, Chevrier N, Leite AP, Donner Y, et al. (2009) Unbiased reconstruction of a
mammalian transcriptional network mediating pathogen responses. Science .
19. Ideker T, Thorsson V, Ranish J, Christmas R, Buhler J, et al. (2001) Integrated genomic and
proteomic analyses of a systematically perturbed metabolic network. Science 292: 929–934.
20. Gstaiger M, Aebersold R (2009) Applying mass spectrometry-based proteomics to genetics, ge-
nomics and network biology. Nat Rev Genet 10: 617–627.
21. Sachs K, Perez O, Pe’er D, Lauffenburger DA, Nolan GP (2005) Causal protein-signaling networks
derived from multiparameter single-cell data. Science 308: 523–529.
22. Niu W, Li Z, Zhan W, Iyer VR, Marcotte EM (2008) Mechanisms of cell cycle control revealed by
a systematic and quantitative overexpression screen in s. cerevisiae. PLoS Genetics 4: e1000120.
23. Lu R, Markowetz F, Unwin R, Leek J, Airoldi E, et al. (2009) Systems-level dynamic analyses of
fate change in murine embryonic stem cells. Nature 462(7271):358-362
24. Birmingham A, Selfors L, Forster T, Wrobel D, Kennedy C, et al. (2009) Statistical methods for
analysis of high-throughput RNA interference screens. Nature Methods 6: 569–575.
25. K¨onig R, Chiang Cy, Tu B, Yan SF, DeJesus P, et al. (2007) A probability-based approach for
the analysis of large-scale RNAi screens. Nature Methods advanced online publication: 847–849.
26. Carpenter AE, Jones TR, Lamprecht MR, Clarke C, Kang IH, et al. (2006) Cellprofiler: image
analysis software for identifying and quantifying cell phenotypes. Genome Biology 7: R100.
27. Sklyar O, Pau G, Smith M, Huber W (2008) EBimage: Image Processing and Image Analysis
Toolkit for R.
28. Jones TR, Carpenter AE, Lamprecht MR, Moffat J, Silver SJ, et al. (2009) Scoring diverse cellular
morphologies in image-based screens with iterative feedback and machine learning. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 106: 1826–1831.

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 8
29. Yin Z, Zhou X, Bakal C, Li F, Sun Y, et al. (2008) Using iterative cluster merging with im-
proved gap statistics to perform online phenotype discovery in the context of high-throughput
rnai screens. BMC Bioinformatics 9: 264.
30. Wang J, Zhou X, Bradley PL, Chang SF, Perrimon N, et al. (2008) Cellular phenotype recognition
for high-content rna interference genome-wide screening. J Biomol Screen 13: 29–39.
31. Hahne F, Arlt D, Sauermann M, Majety M, Poustka A, et al. (2006) Statistical methods and
software for the analysis of high throughput reverse genetic assays using flow cytometry readouts.
Genome Biology 7: R77.
32. Smyth GK (2005) Limma: linear models for microarray data. In: Gentleman R, Carey V, Dudoit
S, R Irizarry WH, editors, Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Solutions using R and
Bioconductor, New York: Springer. pp. 397–420.
33. Markowetz F, Bloch J, Spang R (2005) Non-transcriptional pathway features reconstructed from
secondary effects of RNA interference. Bioinformatics 21: 4026–4032.
34. Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, et al. (2000) Gene ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. the gene ontology consortium. Nat Genet 25: 25–29.
35. Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, et al. (2005) Gene set enrichment
analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 102: 15545–15550.
36. Huang DW, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA (2009) Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene
lists using david bioinformatics resources. Nat Protoc 4: 44–57.
37. Sealfon RSG, Hibbs MA, Huttenhower C, Myers CL, Troyanskaya OG (2006) GOLEM: an inter-
active graph-based gene-ontology navigation and analysis tool. BMC Bioinformatics 7: 443.
38. Bauer S, Grossmann S, Vingron M, Robinson PN (2008) Ontologizer 2.0–a multifunctional tool
for GO term enrichment analysis and data exploration. Bioinformatics 24: 1650–1651.
39. Alexa A, Rahnenfu¨hrer J, Lengauer T (2006) Improved scoring of functional groups from gene
expression data by decorrelating GO graph structure. Bioinformatics 22: 1600–1607.
40. Bork P, Jensen LJ, von Mering C, Ramani AK, Lee I, et al. (2004) Protein interaction networks
from yeast to human. Curr Opin Struct Biol 14: 292–299.
41. Stelzl U, Worm U, Lalowski M, Haenig C, Brembeck FH, et al. (2005) A human protein-protein
interaction network: a resource for annotating the proteome. Cell 122: 957–968.
42. Ma’ayan A, Jenkins SL, Neves S, Hasseldine A, Grace E, et al. (2005) Formation of regulatory
patterns during signal propagation in a mammalian cellular network. Science 309: 1078–1083.
43. Lee I, Date SV, Adai AT, Marcotte EM (2004) A probabilistic functional network of yeast genes.
Science 306: 1555–1558.
44. Myers CL, Robson D, Wible A, Hibbs MA, Chiriac C, et al. (2005) Discovery of biological networks
from diverse functional genomic data. Genome Biol 6: R114.
45. Guan Y, Myers CL, Lu R, Lemischka IR, Bult CJ, et al. (2008) A genomewide functional network
for the laboratory mouse. PLoS Comput Biol 4: e1000165.

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 9
46. Jensen LJ, Kuhn M, Stark M, Chaffron S, Creevey C, et al. (2009) String 8–a global view on
proteins and their functional interactions in 630 organisms. Nucleic Acids Res 37: D412–D416.
47. Breitkreutz BJ, Stark C, Reguly T, Boucher L, Breitkreutz A, et al. (2008) The BioGRID inter-
action database: 2008 update. Nucleic Acids Res 36: D637–D640.
48. Kaplow I, Singh R, Friedman A, Bakal C, Perrimon N, et al. (2009) RNAiCut: automated detec-
tion of significant genes from functional genomic screens. Nature Methods 6: 476–477.
49. Wang L, Tu Z, Sun F (2009) A network-based integrative approach to prioritize reliable hits from
multiple genome-wide rnai screens in drosophila. BMC Genomics 10: 220.
50. Berndt JD, Biechele TL, Moon RT, Major MB (2009) Integrative analysis of genome-wide RNA
interference screens. Science Signaling 2: pt4.
51. Lee I, Lehner B, Crombie C, Wong W, Fraser A, et al. (2008) A single gene network accurately
predicts phenotypic effects of gene perturbation in caenorhabditis elegans. Nature Genetics 40:
181–188.
52. Krishnan M, Ng A, Sukumaran B, Gilfoy F, Uchil P, et al. (2008) RNA interference screen for
human genes associated with west nile virus infection. Nature 455: 242–245.
53. Ideker T, Ozier O, Schwikowski B, Siegel AF (2002) Discovering regulatory and signalling circuits
in molecular interaction networks. Bioinformatics 18 Suppl 1: S233–S240.
54. K¨onig R, Zhou Y, Elleder D, Diamond TL, Bonamy GMC, et al. (2008) Global analysis of host-
pathogen interactions that regulate early-stage HIV-1 replication. Cell 135: 49–60.
55. Dittrich M, Klau G, Rosenwald A, Dandekar T, Mu¨ller T (2008) Identifying functional modules
in protein-protein interaction networks: an integrated exact approach. Bioinformatics 24: i223.
56. Bankhead A, Sach I, Ni C, LeMeur N, Kruger M, et al. (2009) Knowledge based identification of
essential signaling from genome-scale siRNA experiments. BMC Systems Biology 3: 80.
57. Tu ZCA, Wong K, Mitnaul L, Edwards S, Sach I, et al. (2009) Integrating siRNA and protein-
protein interaction data to identify an expanded insulin signaling network. Genome Research 19:
1057.
58. Aerts S, Lambrechts D, Maity S, Van Loo P, Coessens B, et al. (2006) Gene prioritization through
genomic data fusion. Nat Biotech 24: 537–544.
59. Rung J, Schlitt T, Brazma A, Freivalds K, Vilo J (2002) Building and analysing genome-wide
gene disruption networks. Bioinformatics 18: 202–210.
60. Aho AV, Garey MR, Ullman JD (1972) The transitive reduction of a directed graph. SIAM
Journal on Computing 1: 131-137.
61. Wagner A (2001) How to reconstruct a large genetic network from n gene perturbations in fewer
than n2 easy steps. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England) 17: 1183–1197.
62. Tresch A, Beissbarth T, Su¨ltmann H, Kuner R, Poustka A, et al. (2007) Discrimination of direct
and indirect interactions in a network of regulatory effects. Journal of computational biology : a
journal of computational molecular cell biology 14: 1217–1228.

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 10
63. Kaderali L, Dazert E, Zeuge U, Frese M, Bartenschlager R (2009) Reconstructing signaling path-
ways from rnai data using probabilistic boolean threshold networks. Bioinformatics 25: 2229–
2235.
64. Friedman N (2004) Inferring cellular networks using probabilistic graphical models. Science 303:
799–805.
65. Markowetz F, Spang R (2007) Inferring cellular networks–a review. BMC Bioinformatics 8 Suppl
6: S5.
66. Pearl J (2000) Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference. Cambridge University Press.
67. Ellis B, Wong WH (2008) Learning causal bayesian network structures from experimental data.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 103: 778-789.
68. Peer D, Regev A, Elidan G, Friedman N (2001) Inferring subnetworks from perturbed expression
profiles. Bioinformatics 17: 215–224.
69. Gat-Viks I, Tanay A, Raijman D, Shamir R (2006) A probabilistic methodology for integrating
knowledge and experiments on biological networks. J Comput Biol 13: 165–181.
70. Rogers S, Girolami M (2005) A Bayesian regression approach to the inference of regulatory net-
works from gene expression data. Bioinformatics 21: 3131–3137.
71. Werhli AV, Grzegorczyk M, Husmeier D (2006) Comparative evaluation of reverse engineering
gene regulatory networks with relevance networks, graphical Gaussian models and Bayesian net-
works. Bioinformatics 22: 2523–2531.
72. Zak DE, Gonye GE, Schwaber JS, Doyle FJ (2003) Importance of input perturbations and stochas-
tic gene expression in the reverse engineering of genetic regulatory networks: insights from an
identifiability analysis of an in silico network. Genome Res 13: 2396–2405.
73. Markowetz F, Grossmann S, Spang R (2005) Probabilistic soft interventions in conditional gaus-
sian networks. Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) .
74. Ulitsky I, Shamir R (2007) Identification of functional modules using network topology and high-
throughput data. BMC Syst Biol 1: 8.
75. Yeang CH, Ideker T, Jaakkola T (2004) Physical network models. J Comput Biol 11: 243–262.
76. Yeang CH, Mak HC, McCuine S, Workman C, Jaakkola T, et al. (2005) Validation and refinement
of gene-regulatory pathways on a network of physical interactions. Genome biology 6: R62.
77. Ourfali O, Shlomi T, Ideker T, Ruppin E, Sharan R (2007) SPINE: a framework for signaling-
regulatory pathway inference from cause-effect experiments. Bioinformatics 23: i359–66.
78. Ljung L (1986) System Identification: Theory for the User. Prentice Hall.
79. Tegner J, Yeung MKS, Hasty J, Collins JJ (2003) Reverse engineering gene networks: integrating
genetic perturbations with dynamical modeling. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
100: 5944–5949.
80. Gardner TS, di Bernardo D, Lorenz D, Collins JJ (2003) Inferring genetic networks and identifying
compound mode of action via expression profiling. Science 301: 102–105.
81. Xiong M, Li J, Fang X (2004) Identification of genetic networks. Genetics 166: 1037–1052.

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 11
82. di Bernardo D, Thompson MJ, Gardner TS, Chobot SE, Eastwood EL, et al. (2005) Chemoge-
nomic profiling on a genome-wide scale using reverse-engineered gene networks. Nature Biotech-
nology 23: 377–383.
83. Lorenz DR, Cantor CR, Collins JJ (2009) A network biology approach to aging in yeast. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106: 1145.
84. Nelander S, Wang W, Nilsson B, She QB, Pratilas C, et al. (2008) Models from experiments:
combinatorial drug perturbations of cancer cells. Molecular systems biology 4: 216.
85. Markowetz F, Kostka D, Troyanskaya O, Spang R (2007) Nested effects models for high-
dimensional phenotyping screens. Bioinformatics 23: 305–312.
86. Fr¨ohlich H, Fellmann M, Sueltmann H, Poustka A, Beissbarth T (2007) Large scale statistical
inference of signaling pathways from RNAi and microarray data. BMC Bioinformatics 8: 386.
87. Tresch A, Markowetz F (2008) Structure learning in nested effects models. Stat Appl Genet Mol
Biol 7.
88. Fr¨ohlich H, Fellmann M, Su¨ltmann H, Poustka A, Beissbarth T (2008) Estimating large scale
signaling networks through nested effect models with intervention effects from microarray data.
Bioinformatics .
89. Fr¨ohlich H, Tresch A, Beißbarth T (2009) Nested effects models for learning signaling networks
from perturbation data. Biometrical journal 51: 304–323.
90. Fr¨ohlich H, Beißbarth T, Tresch A, Kostka D, Jacob J, et al. (2008) Analyzing gene perturbation
screens with nested effects models in R and Bioconductor. Bioinformatics 24: 2549–2550.
91. Vaske CJ, House C, Luu T, Frank B, Yeang CH, et al. (2009) A factor graph nested effects model
to identify networks from genetic perturbations. PLoS computational biology 5: e1000274.
92. Anchang B, Sadeh M, Jacob J, Tresch A, Vlad M, et al. (2009) Modeling the temporal interplay
of molecular signaling and gene expression by using dynamic nested effects models. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 106: 6447.
93. Sopko R, Huang D, Preston N, Chua G, Papp B, et al. (2006) Mapping pathways and phenotypes
by systematic gene overexpression. Molecular cell 21: 319–330.
94. Stokic D, Hanel R, Thurner S (2009) A fast and efficient gene-network reconstruction method
from multiple over-expression experiments. BMC Bioinformatics 10: 253.
95. Yosef N, Kaufman A, Ruppin E (2006) Inferring functional pathways from multi-perturbation
data. Bioinformatics 22: e539.
96. MacCarthy T, Pomiankowski A, Seymour R (2005) Using large-scale perturbations in gene net-
work reconstruction. BMC Bioinformatics 6: 11.
97. Rockman M (2008) Reverse engineering the genotype-phenotype map with natural genetic vari-
ation. Nature 456: 738–744.
98. Herrgard MJ, Swainston N, Dobson P, Dunn WB, Arga KY, et al. (2008) A consensus yeast
metabolic network reconstruction obtained from a community approach to systems biology. Nat
Biotechnol 26: 1155–1160.

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 12
99. Duarte NC, Becker SA, Jamshidi N, Thiele I, Mo ML, et al. (2007) Global reconstruction of the
human metabolic network based on genomic and bibliomic data. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104:
1777–1782.
100. Papp B, Pl C, Hurst LD (2004) Metabolic network analysis of the causes and evolution of enzyme
dispensability in yeast. Nature 429: 661–664.
101. Fong SS, Palsson B (2004) Metabolic gene-deletion strains of escherichia coli evolve to computa-
tionally predicted growth phenotypes. Nat Genet 36: 1056–1058.
102. Motter A, Gulbahce N, Almaas E, Barabasi AL (2008) Predicting synthetic rescues in metabolic
networks. Mol Sys Bio 4: 168.
103. Shlomi T, Cabili MN, Herrgrd MJ, Palsson B, Ruppin E (2008) Network-based prediction of
human tissue-specific metabolism. Nat Biotechnol 26: 1003–1010.
104. Becker SA, Palsson BO (2008) Context-specific metabolic networks are consistent with experi-
ments. PLoS Comput Biol 4: e1000082.
105. Deutscher D, Meilijson I, Schuster S, Ruppin E (2008) Can single knockouts accurately single out
gene functions? BMC Systems Biology 2: 50.
106. Gitter A, Siegfried Z, Klutstein M, Fornes O, Oliva B, et al. (2009) Backup in gene regulatory
networks explains differences between binding and knockout results. Mol Syst Biol 5.
107. Tong AHY, Lesage G, Bader GD, Ding H, Xu H, et al. (2004) Global mapping of the yeast genetic
interaction network. Science 303: 808–813.
108. Myers CL (2009) Analysis of combinatorial gene perturbation screens. PLoS Comput Biol IN
PREPARATION: (the ’partner review’ to this one - what’s the best way to cite it?).
109. Pournara I, Wernisch L (2004) Reconstruction of gene networks using Bayesian learning and
manipulation experiments. Bioinformatics 20: 2934–2942.
110. Yoo C, Cooper GF (2004) An evaluation of a system that recommends microarray experiments
to perform to discover gene-regulation pathways. Artif Intell Med 31: 169–182.
111. Szczurek E, Gat-Viks I, Tiuryn J, Vingron M (2009) Elucidating regulatory mechanisms down-
stream of a signaling pathway using informative experiments. Mol Syst Biol 5: 287.
112. Ideker TE, Thorsson V, Karp RM (2000) Discovery of regulatory interactions through perturba-
tion: inference and experimental design. Pac Symp Biocomput : 305–316.
113. Gentleman RC, Carey VJ, Bates DM, Bolstad B, Dettling M, et al. (2004) Bioconductor: Open
software development for computational biology and bioinformatics. Genome Biology 5: R80.
114. Shannon P, Markiel A, Ozier O, Baliga NS, Wang JT, et al. (2003) Cytoscape: a software envi-
ronment for integrated models of biomolecular interaction networks. Genome Res 13: 2498–2504.

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 13
Figures and legends
a External signals b
P P P
Protein
Molecular pathways 
and networks
mRNA
DNA
WT
KO Model A B C D E
Perturbing C 
affects expression of E
Correlation A-E
Phenotypes
Figure 1. Cellular networks underlying observable phenotypes. (a) Phenotypes are the
response of the cell to external signals mediated by cellular networks and pathways. The goal of
computation is to reconstruct these networks from the observed phenotypes. (b) Global molecular
phenotypes like gene expression allow a view inside the cell but also have limitations. This is
exemplified here in a cartoon pathway adapted from [61] showing a cascade of five genes/proteins (A-E).
Proteins A-C form a kinase cascade, D is a transcription factor acting on E. Up-regulation of A starts
information flow in the cascade and results in E being turned on. In gene expression data this is visible
as a correlation between A and E (represented as an undirected edge in the model). Experimentally
perturbing a genes, say C, removes the corresponding protein from the cascade, breaks the information
flow and results in an expression change at E (represented as an arrow in the model). However, the
different phosphorylation and activation states of proteins B-D will most probably not be visible as
changes in gene expression. Thus, due to the pathway mostly acting on the protein level most parts of
the cascade (dashed arrows in the model) can not be inferred from gene expression data directly.
a b
Overrepresentation of hits  Gene set enrichment analysis
in gene set
Hypergeometric test
Gene set All genes
Gene set
Hits
Genes ordered by  Gene set shows trend  Gene set shows 
strength of phenotype Hits in gene set All hits to strong phenotypes no signficant trend
Figure 2. Functional annotation of hits by enrichment analysis. (a) In the first approach [38]
a cutoff is applied to select the hits with strongest phenotypes. A hyper-geometric test then evaluates if
the overlap between the hits and a given gene set is surprisingly large (or small) compared to the
overlap with a random set. (b) A second approach [35] does not need a cutoff. It maps the gene set
(black bars) onto the observed phenotypes and quantifies if there is a significant trend or if the genes
are spread out uniformly over the whole range.

| 0    | 1   |
|:-----|:----|
| mRNA |     |

|    | None   |
|:---|:-------|
|    |        |
|    |        |
|    |        |

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 14
a
Protein / gene
Hit in low-dim screen
Target in high-dim screen
Rich in hits
Background network
High correlation between
b phenotypes
Connected in background
network and highly correlated
phenotypes
Figure 3. Extracting rich sub-networks. Different patterns in the graph point to a common
cellular mechanism causing a phenotype: (a) hits in a low-dimensional screen (red nodes) clustering in
highly connected sub-networks, and (b) high correlation between high-dimensional phenotypes of target
genes connected in the background network. The black graph represents any type of background
network.

| 0   | 1   |
|:----|:----|
|     |     |

|    | None   |    |    |
|:---|:-------|:---|:---|
|    |        |    |    |

Network analysis of gene perturbation screens 15
Tables
Table 1. Examples of software for network analysis of gene perturbation screens.
General data analysis and network visualization
Bioconductor Software environment for the analysis of genomic www.bioconductor.org
data featuring hundreds of contributed packages
[113]
Cytoscape Software platform for visualizing molecular interac- www.cytoscape.org
tion networks and integrating them with other data
types [114]
Setting up data for network analysis
cellHTS2 End-to-end analysis of cell-based screens: from raw www.bioconductor.org
intensity readings to the annotated hit list [6]
RNAither Analysis of cell-based RNAi screens, includes quality www.bioconductor.org
assessment and customizable normalization [7]
EBImage Cell image analysis and feature extraction [27] www.bioconductor.org
CellProfiler Cell image analysis and feature extraction [26] www.cellprofiler.org
Enrichment analysis
DAVID Tools for data annotation, visualization and integra- david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov
tion [36]
GOLEM Enrichment analysis and visualization of GO graph function.princeton.edu/GOLEM
(Fig 2a) [37]
Ontologizer Enrichment analysis with dependencies between GO compbio.charite.de/ontologizer
nodes (Fig 2a) [38]
GSEA Gene set enrichment analysis (Fig 2b) [35] www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/
Clustering and ranking
Cell Profiler Interactive exploration and analysis of multidimen- www.cellprofiler.org
Analyst sional data from image-based experiments [28]
PhenoBlast Ranking of phenotype profiles according to similarity www.rnai.org
with given profile [11]
Endeavour Prioritizes hits for further analysis [58] www.esat.kuleuven.be/endeavour/
Finding rich sub-networks
heinz Finds optimal subnetworks rich in hits (Fig 3a) [55] www.planet-lisa.net
jActiveModulesFinds heuristic subnetworks rich in hits (Fig 3a) [53] www.cytoscape.org
Matisse Finds subnetworks with high phenotypic similarity acgt.cs.tau.ac.il/matisse/
(Fig 3b) [74]
Network reconstruction
nem Nested Effects Models reconstruct pathway features www.bioconductor.org
from subset relations in high-dim phenotypes [90]
copia Copia uses MIMO models to reconstruct networks cbio.mskcc.org/copia/
from perturbations [84]
The table contains the name of the method, a short description with reference, and a webpage where it
can be obtained. This list is far from comprehensive, but hopefully provides a starting point even for
non-coding experimentalists.

| 0            | 1                                                    | 2                    |
|:-------------|:-----------------------------------------------------|:---------------------|
| Bioconductor | Software environment for the analysis of genomic     | www.bioconductor.org |
| Cytoscape    | data featuring hundreds of contributed packages      | www.cytoscape.org    |
|              | [113]                                                |                      |
|              | Software platform for visualizing molecular interac- |                      |
|              | tion networks and integrating them with other data   |                      |
|              | types [114]                                          |                      |

| 0            | 1                                                   | 2                    |
|:-------------|:----------------------------------------------------|:---------------------|
| cellHTS2     | End-to-end analysis of cell-based screens: from raw | www.bioconductor.org |
| RNAither     | intensity readings to the annotated hit list [6]    | www.bioconductor.org |
| EBImage      | Analysisofcell-basedRNAiscreens,includesquality     | www.bioconductor.org |
| CellProfiler | assessment and customizable normalization [7]       | www.cellprofiler.org |
|              | Cell image analysis and feature extraction [27]     |                      |
|              | Cell image analysis and feature extraction [26]     |                      |

| 0           | 1                                                     | 2                              |
|:------------|:------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------|
| DAVID       | Tools for data annotation, visualization and integra- | david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov         |
| GOLEM       | tion [36]                                             | function.princeton.edu/GOLEM   |
| Ontologizer | Enrichment analysis and visualization of GO graph     | compbio.charite.de/ontologizer |
| GSEA        | (Fig 2a) [37]                                         | www.broadinstitute.org/gsea/   |
|             | Enrichment analysis with dependencies between GO      |                                |
|             | nodes (Fig 2a) [38]                                   |                                |
|             | Gene set enrichment analysis (Fig 2b) [35]            |                                |

| 0             | 1                                                   | 2                               |
|:--------------|:----------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------|
| Cell Profiler | Interactive exploration and analysis of multidimen- | www.cellprofiler.org            |
| Analyst       | sional data from image-based experiments [28]       | www.rnai.org                    |
| PhenoBlast    | Rankingofphenotypeprofilesaccordingtosimilarity     | www.esat.kuleuven.be/endeavour/ |
| Endeavour     | with given profile [11]                             |                                 |
|               | Prioritizes hits for further analysis [58]          |                                 |

| 0             | 1                                                    | 2                          |
|:--------------|:-----------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------|
| heinz         | Finds optimal subnetworks rich in hits (Fig 3a) [55] | www.planet-lisa.net        |
| jActiveModule | sFindsheuristicsubnetworksrichinhits(Fig3a)[53]      | www.cytoscape.org          |
| Matisse       | Finds subnetworks with high phenotypic similarity    | acgt.cs.tau.ac.il/matisse/ |
|               | (Fig 3b) [74]                                        |                            |

| 0     | 1                                                  | 2                     |
|:------|:---------------------------------------------------|:----------------------|
| nem   | Nested Effects Models reconstruct pathway features | www.bioconductor.org  |
| copia | from subset relations in high-dim phenotypes [90]  | cbio.mskcc.org/copia/ |
|       | Copia uses MIMO models to reconstruct networks     |                       |
|       | from perturbations [84]                            |                       |