Draft version September 11, 2018
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 12/16/11
MAGNETAR-POWERED SUPERLUMINOUS SUPERNOVAE MUST FIRST BE EXPLODED BY JETS
Noam Soker1 & Avishai Gilkis2
Draft version September 11, 2018
ABSTRACT
We analyze recent magnetar light-curve modeling of 38 hydrogen-poor superluminous supernovae
7102 voN 02  ]EH.hp-ortsa[  3v65380.8071:viXra
(SLSNe), and find that the energies of the explosions themselves, that take place before the magnetar
energy is released, are more than what the neutrino-driven explosion mechanism can supply for about
half of the systems. These SLSNe must have been exploded by a different process than the delayed
neutrino mechanism, most likely the jet feedback mechanism (JFM). The conclusion for magnetar
modeling of SLSNe is that jets launched at magnetar birth cannot be ignored, not at the explosion
itself and not later when mass fall-back might occur. More generally, the present analysis strengthens
the call for a paradigm shift from neutrino-driven to jet-driven explosion models of all core collapse
supernovae.
1. INTRODUCTION (Reilly et al. 2017), as well as asymmetrical CCSN rem-
nants (e.g., Lopez et al. 2014; Milisavljevic et al. 2013).
Super luminous supernovae (SLSNe) are supernovae
As well, many studies simulated jets in CCSNe (e.g.,
that are much brighter at maximum and radiate a
Bromberg & Tchekhovskoy 2016; Barnes et al. 2017;
much larger energy than typical core collapse super-
Chen et al. 2017a). However, the majority of earlier
novae (CCSNe), sometimes over long rise and de-
studies take jets to play significant roles only in rare
cline time scales (e.g., Gal-Yam 2012). Their peak
types of CCSNe. Sobacchi et al. (2017) speculate that
luminosity is about 1044 erg s−1, and the total ra-
relativistic jets power all Type Ib/c CCSNe. We, on
diated energy is & 1050 erg (e.g., Wang et al. 2016;
the other hand, strongly support the jet feedback ex-
Arcavi et al. 2016; Sorokina et al. 2016; Liu et al. 2017;
plosion mechanism, according to which all CCSNe are
De Cia et al. 2017; Lunnan et al. 2017). In many recent
exploded by jets that act in a negative feedback mech-
papers the extra energy of SLSNe and the long dura-
anism (e.g., Papish & Soker 2011; Gilkis & Soker 2015;
tion of some of them are attributed to energy released
Bear & Soker 2017; Bear et al. 2017; Grichener & Soker
by magnetars, i.e., rapidly rotating magnetized neu-
2017; Soker 2017b; see Soker 2016b for a review).
tron stars (e.g., Greiner et al. 2015; Metzger et al. 2015;
In a recent study Nicholl et al. (2017b) model the mul-
Kangas et al. 2017; Kasen et al. 2016; Chen et al. 2017a;
ticolour light curves of 38 hydrogen-poor SLSNe with a
Margutti et al. 2017; Mazzali et al. 2017; Metzger et al.
magnetar model, and estimate the magnetar and ejecta
2017; Nicholl et al. 2017a; Villar et al. 2017; Yu et al.
properties. They take the explosion itself to be driven by
2017, to list some works from the last three years).
neutrinos and have an energy of approximately 1051 erg.
In recent papers one of us argued that supernovae that
In the present paper we examine the implications of their
are powered at late times by magnetars are most likely
modeling. In section 2 we describe the sample of 21
exploded by jets (Soker 2016a, 2017a). In general, the
SLSNe we take from their list of 38 SLSNe, and derive the
formation of a magnetar requires the pre-collapse core
required explosion energies. In section 3 we discuss our
of the stellar progenitor to spin at a high rate. As such
finding that the explosion energy in many of these SLSNe
a core collapses it forms an accretion disk around the
is much above what the neutrino mechanism can supply,
newly born NS or black hole (e.g., Gilkis 2016), and jets
and compare with a theoretical prediction of the JFM. In
are likely to be launched (e.g., Nishimura et al. 2015).
section 4 we present our view that the jets make a very
In a recent study Chen et al. (2017a) performed 2D sim-
small amount of r-process elements, hence the presence
ulations of magnetar-powered CCSNe driven by jets.
of jets in most (all) CCSNe does not contradict observa-
In some cases the energy carried by the jets is larger
tions. In section 5 we conclude by further strengthening
than what is stored in the newly born magnetar. This
our call for a paradigm shift from neutrino-driven to jet-
further suggests that some SLSNe are powered by late
driven explosion models of all CCSNe.
jets, as part of the jet feedback mechanism (JFM; e.g.,
Gilkis et al. 2016), rather than by, or in addition to, a
2. THE EXPLOSION ENERGY
magnetar.
Many studies over the years mentioned the possible Our aim is not to refit a magnetar model to each one
role of jets in exploding CCSNe (.e.g, Wheeler et al. of the SLSNe, but rather to use the same assumptions
2002). Examples from recent years include the axisym- and parameters as derived by Nicholl et al. (2017b) in
metrical explosions of SN 2015bn (Inserra et al. 2016), their modeling, and from that to estimate the energy of
SN 2013EJ (Mauerhan et al. 2017), and of SN 2009ip the explosion itself, E . We use the same equations as
SN
given by them.
1 Department of Physics, Technion – Israel Institute of Tech- The rate of energy loss by the magnetar is given by
nology, Haifa 32000, Israel; soker@physics.technion.ac.il
2 Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley −2
dE E t
mag mag,0
Rise, Cambridge, CB3 0HA, UK; agilkis@ast.cam.ac.uk = − 1 + , (1)
dt t (cid:18) t (cid:19)
mag,0 mag,0

2
where subscript zero means that the value is taken at of Table 1. Nicholl et al. (2017b) list the initial values
t = 0. The magnetar rotational energy is given by (at t = 0) of their modeling for M , P, B , and for the
NS ⊥
minimum kinetic energy 15 days after maximum bolo-
3/2 −2
M P metric light E . The time to maximum light we take
E = 2.6 × 1052 NS erg, (2) k,min
mag (cid:18)1.4M (cid:19) (cid:18)1ms(cid:19) either from Nicholl et al. (2017b) or from De Cia et al.
⊙
(2017). We take the minimum radiated energy from sev-
and its spin-down time is given by
eral sources as indicated in the seventh column. In the
last three columns we list the values of the explosion ener-
3/2 2 −2
M P B
NS ⊥ gies for η = 1, η = 1.5, and η = 2, according to equation
t = 1.5 day,
mag
(cid:18)1.4M (cid:19) (cid:18)1ms(cid:19) (cid:18)1014G(cid:19) (5).
⊙
(3) The uncertainties in the values of the parameters that
where P and M are the spin period and mass of the NS, Nicholl et al. (2017b) derive are large, typically about
NS
respectively, and B is the component of the magnetic 20%−50%. These imply uncertainties also in our derived
⊥
field perpendicular to the spin axis. value of E of about 50%. We do not list the uncer-
SN
The energy of the magnetar at time t is given by tainties because they are smaller than the uncertainties
in the value of η, that change the value of E by up to
−1 SN
t a factor of about 4 (see Table 1). As well, adding the
E (t) = E 1 + . (4)
mag mag,0 (cid:18) t (cid:19) uncertainties will mask the values we present here and
mag,0
will not change at all our main conclusion that the de-
Since Nicholl et al. (2017b) estimate the minimum layed neutrino explosion mechanism cannot account for
kinetic energy 15 days after bolometric maximum, the explosion of the SLSNe we study here. But the un-
E = E (t +15), we estimate the explosion energy certainties should be kept in mind for individual objects.
k,min k max
E from the relation
SN
3. IMPLICATIONS TO THE JET FEEDBACK
E ≃ E (t + 15) + E (t + 15) EXPLOSION MECHANISM
SN k max rad max
− [E − E (t + 15)]. (5) The problems of the delayed neutrino mechanism (e.g.,
mag,0 mag max
Papish et al. 2015a; Kushnir 2015) suggest that it can-
There are some uncertainties in the radiated energy.
not account for even typical CCSNe. In any case, even
The energy radiated up until 15 days after maximum
its supporters agree that the delayed neutrino mech-
bolometric light, E (t +15), should include also the
rad max anism cannot account for CCSN explosion energies of
thermal energy of the ejecta that has not been radiated E & 2 × 1051 erg (e.g., Fryer 2006; Fryer et al. 2012;
SN
yet. This is not much. As well, in the JFM we might
Sukhbold et al. 2016; Sukhbold & Woosley 2016). For
expect asymmetrical explosions, such that the radiated
η = 1 in equation (6), that is, when the kinetic en-
energy has no spherical symmetry as well. In any case, as
ergy is equal to the minimum kinetic energy estimated
the radiated energy is generally smaller than the kinetic
by Nicholl et al. (2017b), 14 SLSNe have explosion en-
energy, these uncertainties are small. For the radiated
ergies the delayed neutrino mechanism cannot account
energy up to 15 days after maximum we take here 50%
for. This number becomes 20 for the more likely value of
of the estimated radiated energy we find in the literature,
η = 1.5.
which is usually a minimum limit on the total radiated
The explosion energies E (η) that we estimate in sec-
SN
energy, E (t + 15) = 0.5E .
rad max rad,min tion 2 and list in the last three columns of Table 1 are
The kinetic energy of the ejecta, E , is highly uncer-
k uncertain. First, there is the question of the kinetic
tain. Nicholl et al. (2017b) estimate the minimum ki-
energy that Nicholl et al. (2017b) estimate. Second, a
netic energy of the ejecta, E , by taking the expan-
k,min correct modeling of the energy of the magnetar should
sion velocity of the ejecta 15 days after maximum bolo-
include the explosion energy itself, E , as done by,
SN
metric light, but state that the kinetic energy can be
e.g., Kasen & Bildsten (2010) and Kasen et al. (2016).
twice as large. For that, we take the kinetic energy of
Nonetheless, the conclusion that many of the SLSNe can-
the ejecta 15 days after maximum light to be
not be exploded by neutrinos holds.
Thompson et al. (2004) proposed that a rapidly rotat-
E (t + 15) = ηE , (6)
k max k,min
ing magnetized NS can blow a strong wind, termed a
with 1 ≤ η ≤ 2, where η = 1 represents the Nicholl et al. neutrino-magnetocentrifugallydriven wind, and that this
(2017b) estimate. wind can account for hyperenergetic supernovae. How-
Our criterion to include an object from the listed 38 ever, they require the magnetic field of the NS to be
SLSNe of Nicholl et al. (2017b) is that the spin-down & 1015 G, much larger than the values that Nicholl et al.
time at t = 0 obeys the relation t > 0.5t , where (2017b) deduce for the SLSNe studied here. Moreover, a
mag,0 max
t is the time from explosion to maximum bolometric wind will substantially spin-down the NS, such that the
max
light. The systems that we do not include in our sam- initial angular momentum is much larger than the angu-
ple require a more careful and self-consistent treatment. lar momentum of the magnetar. This requires very high
The explosion energy of some of the systems that we do specific angular momentum of the material that forms
not include in our analysis can in principle be accounted the NS, and a formation of an accretion disk is more
for by the delayed neutrino mechanism, although we con- likely even.
sider it unlikely. We are left then with jet-driven explosions. In an ear-
We list the names of the 21 SLSNe that satisfy the cri- lier paper on the relation between the JFM and mag-
terion of t > 0.5t , and the values of the quanti- netars (Soker 2017a), the following approximate relation
mag,0 max
ties we use for our calculations in the first seven columns between the initial energy of the magnetar and the ex-

3
TABLE 1
SLSN parameters
SLSN P B M E t E E (1) E (1.5) E (2)
NS k,min max rad sn sn sn
(ms) (1014 G) (M ⊙) (foe) (day) (foe) (foe) (foe) (foe)
GAIA16apd 2.93 1.23 1.83 3.69 24 1.6K 1.1 2.9 4.8
PTF12dam 2.28 0.18 1.83 3.03 57D 1.6D 2.6 4.1 5.6
SN2015bn 2.16 0.31 1.78 3.45 72 2.3N 1.0 2.7 4.4
SN2007bi 3.92 0.35 1.81 2.37 45 1.5G 2.7 3.9 5.1
SN2010gx 3.66 0.59 1.79 3.78 12 1.5P 6.1 8.0 9.9
LSQ14mo 4.97 1.01 1.85 2.43 29 0.3C 1.9 3.1 4.3
PTF09cnd 1.46 0.1 1.82 3.29 46D 2.0D 2.2 3.9 5.5
iPTF13ehe 2.57 0.2 1.87 4.48 75 0.4D 3.5 5.8 8.0
PTF09cwl 1.74 0.27 1.86 6.78 37D 1.6D 2.9 6.3 9.7
SN2006oz 2.70 0.32 1.80 2.66 70 0.4E 1.0 2.4 3.7
PTF09atu 1.59 0.09 1.88 8.30 50 1.6D 7.8 11.9 16.1
PS1-14bj 2.82 0.13 1.85 4.61 128L 0.8L 4.4 6.7 9.0
PS1-11ap 3.66 0.82 1.87 1.73 58L 1.0L 0.4 1.3 2.1
DES14X3taz 2.41 0.39 1.87 5.87 55 2S 3.8 6.8 9.7
PS1-10bzj 5.21 1.63 1.86 2.32 29L 0.4L 1.5 2.7 3.9
DES13S2cmm 6.59 0.73 1.76 2.31 32 1A 2.6 3.8 4.9
PS1-10ahf 2.35 0.17 1.85 4.10 131 1M 2.8 4.9 6.9
SCP-06F6 1.78 0.16 1.75 8.35 88 1.7Q 5.9 10.1 14.3
PS1-10pm 1.31 0.06 1.85 9.76 49 0.8L 8.9 13.7 18.6
SNLS-07D2bv 3.49 0.26 1.80 1.85 44 0.5H 1.7 2.6 3.5
SNLS-06D4eu 3.55 0.79 1.88 3.63 44 0.6H 2.1 4.0 5.8
The list of 21 SLSNe analyzed here. The first column lists the name of the SLSNe, followed by P,
B , and M that are the initial rotational period, the component of the magnetic field perpendic-
⊥ NS
ular to the spin axis, and the mass of the neutron star. E is the minimum kinetic energy of the
k,min
ejecta. These four quantities for each SLSN are taken from the modeling of Nicholl et al. (2017b).
We take the time to maximum light either from De Cia et al. (2017) (those marked by superscript
D), or from Nicholl et al. (2017b); those that are marked with superscript L also have a maximum
time in the study by Lunnan et al. (2017). In the seventh column we list the minimum radiated
energy that we take from one of the aforementioned papers or from one of the following papers: K:
Kangas et al. (2017); N: Nicholl et al. (2016); G: Gal-Yam et al. (2009); P: Pastorello et al. (2010);
C: Chen et al. (2017b); E: Leloudas et al. (2012); S: Smith et al. (2016); A: Papadopoulos et al.
(2015); M: McCrum et al. (2015); Q: Quimby et al. (2011); H: Howell et al. (2013). The last three
columns list the explosion energy as calculated by equation (5), and for η = 1, 1.5 and 2, respec-
tively. The energy units in the table are foe (fifty one erg), which equals 1051 erg. The uncertainties
in the values of the parameters that Nicholl et al. (2017b) derive introduce uncertainties in our de-
rived values of E , about 50%, that are smaller than the uncertainties that the unknown values
SN
of η introduce, and hence are not listed here.
plosion energy was derived tation of the JFM as depicted by the solid red line. For
η = 1.6 the predicted relation nicely bounds the SLSNe
E2
from the right and from below. It is possible that the ki-
E ≃ χ SN , (7)
mag,0 1052 erg netic energies of many of the SLSNe that are to the left of
the line are more than a factor of 1.6 larger than the min-
where χ ≈ 1 depends on the moment of inertia of the imum kinetic energies that are derived by Nicholl et al.
NS, the fraction of the gravitational energy of the ac- (2017b). The uncertainties in the values of E resulting
SN
creted gas onto the NS that is carried by the jets, and from the uncertainties in the magnetar parameters, that
the amount of angular momentum that is removed by we estimate to have a typical value of about ±50% before
the jets. The value of χ is expected to change somewhat the larger uncertainties in the values of η are considered,
from one system to another. Nonetheless, we plot this might somewhat displace individual objects on Fig. 1,
relation in Fig. 1, where we also place the 21 systems in but will not change the general trend.
a graph of the initial magnetar energy against the explo-
4. THE R-PROCESS IN THE JET-DRIVEN
sion energy. In calculating the explosion energy for this
EXPLOSION MODEL
graph we take η = 1.6 in equation (6). We also mark
the consequence of taking higher values of η for three The recently observed binary NS merger event
systems. GW170817 shows that r-process elements are formed in
In discussing Fig. 1 we should bear in mind the large this process (e.g., Metzger 2017 for a summary of the
uncertainties in the values of the kinetic energy of the event and references, and Cˆot´e et al. 2017 for specific
SLSNe and the other magnetar parameters as derived by discussion of the r-process). However, it might be that
Nicholl et al. (2017b), and the somewhat different values another site is needed for the synthesis of r-process ele-
that χ ≈ 1 is expected to take for different SLSNe in the ments in low-metallicity stars made early in the evolution
JFM model (Soker 2017a). Despite these, it seems that of the Galaxy (e.g., Thielemann et al. 2017).
the general behavior of the 21 SLSNe that are analyzed In principle, neutron-rich jets that are launched by the
here is that the magnetar energy tends to increase with newly born NS in CCSNe might form r-process elements
the explosion energy. This general behavior is the expec- (e.g., Winteler et al. 2012). The problem with jets that

4
ilar to that in the wind calculated by Hu¨depohl et al.
25 (2010) who found that the wind becomes proton-rich.
fi
t with η = 1.6 Winteler et al. (2012) found a modest change in the neu-
E = E2 /1052 erg tron enrichment as a result of this process, but still one
20 mag,0 SN η=4.4 that can reduce the final production of r-process ele-
ments. (3) The third effect might turn out to be the
]eof[E most important one. In the jittering jets model the jets
15 explode the star by interacting with the core material.
η=2.2
The jets are shocked and form hot bubbles (so even if
0,gam
strong-r process elements have been synthesized in the
10 η=3.3 jets, they will be disintegrated in the shock; Papish et al.
2015b). The final r-process elements are produced inside
the hot bubbles. The simulations of such jets show that
5
core material is mixed into the bubble (Papish & Soker
2014b). The mixing can take place as the jets drag gas
from their surroundings and by instabilities that develop
0
when the jets are shocked. This mixing is expected to
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16
E [foe] further lower the mass of the r-process elements that are
SN
synthesized inside the hot bubble.
Clearly an accurate calculation of the r-process in the
Fig. 1.— A plane of the initial magnetar energy E versus jittering jets model is needed. At this stage we accept the
mag,0
the explosion energy E . To calculate the explosion energy for conclusion of Papish et al. (2015b) that the average mass
SN
the 21 systems that are placed on the graph we take here η = 1.6 per CCSN event of r-process elements in the jittering jets
in equation (6). We also mark the consequence of taking higher model is very low, ≪ 10−4M . Namely, CCSNe cannot
values of η > 1.6 for three systems. The lineis a plot of the relation ⊙
be even the rare site for synthesis of r-process elements
given in equation (7) taken from Soker (2017a).
in old low-metallicity stars. In rare cases jets that are
formed at late times from fall-back material might form
r-process elements as the NS is already cool and there is
are launched at several seconds from the formation of no core material anymore that the jets collide with.
the NS is that because of the high flux of neutrinos that Papish et al. (2015b) suggested that the third possible
are emitted by the cooling NS, neutrons absorb electron- site for r-process elements is a common envelope of a NS
neutrinos and turn into protons. Fischer et al. (2010) spiraling inside the envelope and core of a red supergiant.
and Hu¨depohl et al. (2010) found that a neutrino driven The neutron star accretes mass and launches jets. This
wind becomes proton-rich by this process. The mass- setting is different from jets in CCSNe in key ingredients
loss rate in the neutrino-driven wind as presented by (Papish et al. 2015b). (1) The old NS is cold and the
Hu¨depohl et al. (2010) declines from about 0.03M ⊙ s−1 neutrino flux is very low. This ensures that the neutron-
to about 10−4M s−1 at t = 2 s. The mass-loss rate rich gas that is launched from very close to the NS will
⊙
in the jets of the jittering jets model is ≈ 10−2M s−1 stay so. (2) There is no dense core into which the jets are
⊙
(Papish & Soker 2012, 2014a), and it takes place in the shocked. Hence, the r-process elements that are formed
first 2 seconds when the neutrino luminosity is very high. inside the jet do not disintegrate in a strong shock. (3)
In any case, it is clear that if a large fraction of CC- The NS ejects the massive envelope of the red supergiant,
SNe are powered by jets, to be compatible with the ≈ 10− 30M , but there is no iron production (unlike in
⊙
low r-process abundance these jets cannot produce r- a CCSN). This implies that if the giant is a very metal-
process elements. On average, there is an r-process mass poor star, i.e., this process takes place in the very young
10−4M
of about per CCSN (e.g., Mathews & Cowan Galaxy, the abundance of r-process elements relative to
⊙
1990; Thielemann et al. 2017). Since a substantial iron can be large. Stars that are later formed from the
amount is formed in a binary NS merger, the average ejected envelope will have very low iron abundances but
mass of r-process elements in each CCSN should be less will still have r-process elements. The binary NS merger
10−5M
than about a few times . site has a hard time to account for stars with low iron
⊙
In their simple spherically symmetric calculations abundance but typical r-process abundance relative to
Papish & Soker (2012) have found that the mass of the iron (e.g., Thielemann et al. 2017). The NS common en-
r-process elements that is formed in the jet-inflated bub- velope r-process site might account for such stars. We
10−4M
bles of the jittering jets model is several times . reiterate the suggestion of Papish et al. (2015b) that a
⊙
Namely, 10 times more than what is allowed by observa- NS in a common envelope can form r-process elements,
tions. in particular in the metal-poor early Universe.
As was already pointed out by Papish et al. (2015b),
5. SUMMARY
there are several effects that are expected to substan-
tially reduce the r-process elements mass as estimated In two previous papers one of us already argued that
by Papish & Soker (2012). (1) At early times the jets any CCSN that at late times is powered by a magnetar
are launched from a radius larger than the final radius of is expected to be exploded by jets (Soker 2016a, 2017a).
the NS. Papish & Soker (2012) and Papish et al. (2015b) In the present paper we approached the question of the
pointed out that this leads to less neutron-rich matter in explosion mechanism from a different direction. We ana-
the jet. (2) The conversion of neutrons to protons by lyzed 21 out of the 38 SLSNe that their lightcurves were
electron-neutrinos: The mass-loss rate of the jets is sim- fitted with the magnetar model by Nicholl et al. (2017b),

5
and calculated the explosion energy of these SLSNe. The the explosion energy can be used. (3) Jets can do more
rest of the SLSNe in the sample of Nicholl et al. (2017b) than drive the explosion on a time-scale of seconds. Jets
have a magnetar spin-down time much shorter than the might also power the ejecta at much later times, when
rise time to maximum light, and our analysis becomes some gas from the equatorial plane vicinity falls back
less accurate; these require a self-consistent treatment and forms an accretion disk that launches late jets (e.g.,
of the explosion energy with the magnetar energy. We Gilkis et al. 2016). Late powering by jets alongside the
list our calculated explosion energies for three values of magnetar must be considered as well in fitting the light-
η, where η is defined in equation (6), in the last three curve.
columns of Table 1. Our group (e.g., Papish et al. 2015a; Soker 2017a;
In Fig. 1 we place the 21 SLSNe on the plane of the Grichener & Soker 2017) has called for a paradigm
initial magnetar energy E versus the explosion en- shift from neutrino-driven explosions to jet-driven ex-
mag,0
ergy E , where the explosion energies are calculated plosions of all CCSNe. Several recent studies that find
SN
this time with η = 1.6 for all SLSNe. We also mark the links between the roles of jets in energetic explosions
consequence of taking higher values of η for three sys- and in weaker explosions (e.g., Margutti et al. 2014;
tems. We take the value of η = 1.6 to show that the Sobacchi et al. 2017; Bear et al. 2017) support our call
relation that was derived by Soker (2017a) that we plot (that was also echoed on weaker terms by Piran et al.
by the solid red line (given here in equation 7), bounds 2017). The present study further strengthens our call for
the SLSNe from below and from the right. We speculate a paradigm shift toward jet-driven explosions of all CC-
that for most of the SLSNe to the left of the line the SNe, under the condition that the mass of the r-process
kinetic energies were underestimated by a factor larger elements that are synthesized by the jets is very low. As
than η = 1.6. Using larger values of η would bring them we discuss in section 4 this is likely to be the case. The
toward the red line. jets most likely operate via a negative jet feedback ex-
Our main finding is that the explosion energies them- plosion mechanism.
selves of about half of the 38 SLSNe from the sample
of Nicholl et al. (2017b) are more than what the delayed
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
neutrino mechanism can supply, E > 2 × 1051 erg.
SN
This has three implications. (1) The explosion cannot We thank Brian Metzger for helpful comments. We
be driven by neutrinos. (2) The modeling of SLSNe with thank an anonymous referee for promoting the discussion
magnetars must include the explosion energy as a param- on the r-process (section 4). This research was supported
eter, and cannot assume an explosion energy of 1051 erg. by the E. and J. Bishop Research Fund at the Technion
The explosion energy can be either a free parameter, or and by a grant from the Israel Science Foundation. A.G.
the relation (7) between the initial magnetar energy and is supported by the Blavatnik Family Foundation.
REFERENCES
Arcavi, I., Wolf, W. M., Howell, D. A., et al. 2016, ApJ, 819, 35 Lopez, L. A., Castro, D., Slane, P. O., Ramirez-Ruiz, E., &
Barnes, J., Duffell, P. C., Liu, Y., Modjaz, M., Bianco, F. B., Badenes, C. 2014, ApJ, 788, 5
Kasen, D., & MacFadyen, A. I. 2017, arXiv:1708.02630 Lunnan, R., Chornock, R., Berger, E., et al. 2017,
Bear, E., Grichener, A., & Soker, N. 2017, MNRAS, 472, 1770 arXiv:1708.01619
Bear, E., & Soker, N. 2017, MNRAS, 468, 140 Margutti, R., Chornock, R., Metzger, B. D., et al. 2017,
Bromberg, O., & Tchekhovskoy, A. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 1739 arXiv:1704.05865
Chen, K.-J., Moriya, T. J., Woosley, S., Sukhbold, T., Whalen, Margutti, R., Milisavljevic, D., Soderberg, A. M., et al. 2014,
D. J., Suwa, Y., & Bromm, V. 2017a, ApJ, 839, 85 ApJ, 797, 107
Chen, T.-W., Nicholl, M., Smartt, S. J., et al. 2017b, A&A, 602, Mathews, G. J., & Cowan, J. J. 1990, Nature, 345, 491
A9 Mauerhan, J. C., Van Dyk, S. D., Johansson, J., Hu, M., Fox,
Coˆt´e, B., Fryer, C. L., Belczynski, K., et al. 2017, O. D., Wang, L., Graham, M. L., Filippenko, A. V., &
arXiv:1710.05875 Shivvers, I. 2017, ApJ, 834, 118
De Cia, A., Gal-Yam, A., Rubin, A., et al. 2017, arXiv:1708.01623 Mazzali, P. A., Sauer, D. N., Pian, E., Deng, J., Prentice, S., Ben
Fischer, T., Whitehouse, S. C., Mezzacappa, A., Thielemann, Ami, S., Taubenberger, S., & Nomoto, K. 2017, MNRAS, 469,
F.-K., & Liebend¨orfer, M. 2010, A&A, 517, A80 2498
Fryer, C. L. 2006, New Astronomy Reviews, 50, 492 McCrum, M., Smartt, S. J., Rest, A., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 448,
Fryer, C. L., Belczynski, K., Wiktorowicz, G., Dominik, M., 1206
Kalogera, V., & Holz, D. E. 2012, ApJ, 749, 91 Metzger, B. D. 2017, arXiv:1710.05931
Gal-Yam, A. 2012, Science, 337, 927 Metzger, B. D., Berger, E., & Margalit, B. 2017, ApJ, 841, 14
Gal-Yam, A., Mazzali, P., Ofek, E. O., et al. 2009, Nature, 462, Metzger, B. D., Margalit, B., Kasen, D., & Quataert, E. 2015,
624 MNRAS, 454, 3311
Gilkis, A. 2016, arXiv:1608.05320 Milisavljevic, D., Soderberg, A. M., Margutti, R., et al. 2013,
Gilkis, A., & Soker, N. 2015, ApJ, 806, 28 ApJ, 770, LL38
Gilkis, A., Soker, N., & Papish, O. 2016, ApJ, 826, 178 Nicholl, M., Berger, E., Smartt, S. J., et al. 2016, ApJ, 826, 39
Greiner, J., Mazzali, P. A., Kann, D. A., et al. 2015, Nature, 523, Nicholl, M., Berger, E., Margutti, R., Blanchard, P. K.,
189 Milisavljevic, D., Challis, P., Metzger, B. D., & Chornock, R.
Grichener, A., & Soker, N. 2017, MNRAS, 468, 1226 2017a, ApJ, 835, L8
Howell, D. A., Kasen, D., Lidman, C., et al. 2013, ApJ, 779, 98 Nicholl, M., Guillochon, J., & Berger, E. 2017b, arXiv:1706.00825
Hu¨depohl, L., Mu¨ller, B., Janka, H.-T., Marek, A., & Raffelt, Nishimura, N., Takiwaki, T., & Thielemann, F.-K. 2015, ApJ,
G. G. 2010, Physical Review Letters, 104, 251101 810, 109
Inserra, C., Bulla, M., Sim, S. A., & Smartt, S. J. 2016, ApJ, 831, Papadopoulos, A., D’Andrea, C. B., Sullivan, M., et al. 2015,
79 MNRAS, 449, 1215
Kangas, T., Blagorodnova, N., Mattila, S., et al. 2017, MNRAS, Papish, O., Nordhaus, J., & Soker, N. 2015a, MNRAS, 448, 2362
469, 1246 Papish, O., & Soker, N. 2011, MNRAS, 416, 1697
Kasen, D., & Bildsten, L. 2010, ApJ, 717, 245 Papish, O., & Soker, N. 2012, MNRAS, 421, 2763
Kasen, D., Metzger, B. D., & Bildsten, L. 2016, ApJ, 821, 36 Papish, O., & Soker, N. 2014a, MNRAS, 438, 1027
Kushnir, D. 2015, arXiv:1506.02655 Papish, O., & Soker, N. 2014b, MNRAS, 443, 664
Leloudas, G., Chatzopoulos, E., Dilday, B., et al. 2012, A&A, Papish, O., Soker, N., & Bukay, I. 2015b, MNRAS, 449, 288
541, A129 Pastorello, A., Smartt, S. J., Botticella, M. T., et al. 2010, ApJ,
Liu, Y.-Q., Modjaz, M., & Bianco, F. B. 2017, ApJ, 845, 85 724, L16

6
Piran, T., Nakar, E., Mazzali, P., & Pian, E. 2017, Sukhbold, T., Ertl, T., Woosley, S. E., Brown, J. M., & Janka,
arXiv:1704.08298 H.-T. 2016, ApJ, 821, 38
Quimby, R. M., Kulkarni, S. R., Kasliwal, M. M., et al. 2011, Sukhbold, T., & Woosley, S. E. 2016, ApJ, 820, L38
Nature, 474, 487 Thielemann, F., -K., Eichler, M., Panov, I. V., & Wehmeyer, B.
Reilly, E., Maund, J. R., Baade, D., Wheeler, J. C., H¨oflich, P., 2017, Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science, 67,
Spyromilio, J., Patat, F., & Wang, L. 2017, MNRAS, 470, 1491 annurev-nucl-101916-123246
Smith, M., Sullivan, M., D’Andrea, C. B., et al. 2016, ApJ, 818, Thompson, T. A., Chang, P., & Quataert, E. 2004, ApJ, 611, 380
L8 Villar, V. A., Berger, E., Metzger, B. D., & Guillochon, J. 2017,
Sobacchi, E., Granot, J., Bromberg, O., & Sormani, M. C. 2017, ApJ, 849, 70
MNRAS, 472, 616 Wang, S. Q., Liu, L. D., Dai, Z. G., Wang, L. J., & Wu, X. F.
Soker, N. 2016a, New Astronomy, 47, 88 2016, ApJ, 828, 87
Soker, N. 2016b, New Astronomy Reviews, 75, 1 Wheeler, J. C., Meier, D. L., & Wilson, J. R. 2002, ApJ, 568, 807
Soker, N. 2017a, ApJ, 839, L6 Winteler, C., K¨appeli, R., Perego, A., et al. 2012, ApJ, 750, L22
Soker, N. 2017b, Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics Yu, Y.-W., Zhu, J.-P., Li, S.-Z., Lu¨, H.-J., & Zou, Y.-C. 2017,
(arXiv:1702.03451) ApJ, 840, 12
Sorokina, E., Blinnikov, S., Nomoto, K., Quimby, R., & Tolstov,
A. 2016, ApJ, 829, 17