The Physical Properties of the Cosmic Acceleration
Spyros Basilakos1
1
Academy of Athens, Research Center for Astronomy and Applied Mathematics, Soranou Efesiou 4, 11527, Athens, Greece
The observed late-time acceleration of the cosmic expansion constitutes a fundamental problem
in modern theoretical physics and cosmology. In an attempt to weight the validity of a large number
of dark energy models, I use the recent measurements of the expansion rate of the Universe, the
clustering of galaxies the CMB fluctuations as well as the large scale structure formation, to put
tight constraints on the different models.
PACS numbers: 98.80.-k, 95.35.+d, 95.36.+x
0102 naJ 12  ]OC.hp-ortsa[  2v1181.1001:viXra
Keywords: Cosmology; dark matter; dark energy
1. INTRODUCTION The cluster distribution basically traces scales that have
not yet undergone the non-linear phase of gravitation-
ally clustering, thus simplifying their connections to the
Recent studies in observational cosmology lead to the
initial conditions of cosmic structure formation.
conclusion that the available high quality cosmological
The structure of the paper is as follows. In section 2
data (Type Ia supernovae, CMB, etc.) are well fitted by
we briefly discuss the dark energy issue. In sections 3 and
an emerging “standard model”. This standard model,
4 we present the various dark energy models and we use
assuming flatness, is described by the Friedman equation:
a joint statistical analysis, in order to place constraints
2
a˙ 8πG on the main cosmological parameters. In section 5 we
H2(a) = = [ρ (a) + ρ (a)] , (1)
m X present the corresponding theoretical predictions regard-
(cid:18)a(cid:19) 3
ing the formation of the galaxy clusters. Finally, we draw
where a(t) is the scale factor of the universe, ρ (a) is the our conclusions in section 6. Throughout the paper we
m
density corresponding to the sum of baryonic and cold will use H 71km/sec/Mpc.
0
≃
dark matter, with the latter needed to explain clustering,
and an extra component ρ (a) with negative pressure,
X
called dark energy, needed to explain the observed accel- 2. THE DARK ENERGY EQUATION OF STATE
erated cosmic expansion (eg., Davis et al. 2007; Kowalski
et al. 2008; Komatsu et al. 2009 and references therein).
In the context of general relativity it is well known that
The nature of the dark energy is one of the most
for homogeneous and isotropic flat cosmologies, driven by
fundamental and difficult problems in physics and cos-
non-relativistic matter and dark energy with equation of
mology. Indeed, during the last decade there has been
state p = w(a)ρ , the expansion rate of the Universe
X X
a theoretical debate among the cosmologists regarding
can be written as (see eq.1)
the nature of the exotic “dark energy”. Various candi-
dates have been proposed in the literature, such as a cos- H2(a)
1
E2(a) = = Ω a 3 + Ω e3R dlny[1+w(y)] . (2)
mological constant Λ (vacuum), time-varying Λ(t) cos- H2 m − X a
0
mologies, quintessence, k essence, vector fields, phan-
−
tom, tachyons, Chaplygin gas and the list goes on (for Note, that E(a) is the normalized Hubble flow, Ω is
m
recent reviews see Peebles & Ratra 2003; Copeland, Sami the dimensionless matter density at the present epoch,
& Tsujikawa 2006; Caldwell & Kamionkowski 2009). Ω = 1 Ω is the corresponding dark energy density
X m
−
Within this framework, high energy field theories gener- parameter and w(a) is the dark energy equation of state.
ically indicate that the equation of state of such a dark Inverting the above equation we simply derive
energy is a function of cosmic time. To identify this type
of evolution of the equation of state, a detailed form of 1 2adlnE
w(a) = − − 3 da . (3)
the observed H(a) is required which may be obtained 1 Ω a 3E 2(a)
m − −
by a combination of multiple dark energy observational −
probes. The exact nature of the dark energy has yet to be found
In this cosmological framework, a serious issue is how and thus the dark energy equation of state parameter
(and when) the large scale structures form. Galaxies includes our ignorance regarding the physical mechanism
and large-scale structure grew gravitationally from tiny, which leads to a late cosmic acceleration.
nearly scale-invariant adiabatic Gaussian fluctuations. In On the other hand, it is possible to extent the previous
this paper we focus also on galaxy clusters that occupy methodology in the framework of modified gravity (see
an eminent position in the structure hierarchy, being the Linder & Jenkins 2003; Linder 2004). In this scenario, it
most massive virialized systems known and therefore they is assumed that the dark energy may be an illusion, indi-
appear to be ideal tools for testing theories of struc- cating the need to revise the general relativity and thus
ture formation and extracting cosmological information. also the Friedmann equation. From the mathematical

2
point of view, it can be shown that instead of using the from the WMAP 5-years data (Komatsu et al. 2009) is
exact Hubble flow through a modification of the Fried- R = 1.71 0.019 at z = 1090 [or a = (1 + z ) 1
ls ls ls −
± ≃
mann equation we can utilize a Hubble flow that looks 9.17 10 4]. In this case, the χ2 function is given
− cmb
×
like the nominal one (see eq.1). The key point here is
to consider that the accelerated expansion of the uni- [R(p) 1.71]2
χ2 (p) = − (7)
verse can be attributed to a “geometrical” dark energy cmb 0.0192
component. Due to the fact that the matter density in
Finally, we use the Union08 sample of 307 supernovae
the universe (baryonic+dark) can not accelerate the cos-
of Kowalski et al. (2008). The corresponding χ2 func-
mic expansion, we perform the following parametrization SNIa
tion becomes:
(Linder & Jenkins 2003; Linder 2004):
307 2
H2(a) µth(a i,p) µobs(a i)
E2(a) = = Ω a 3 + δH2 . (4) χ2 (p) = − . (8)
H2 m − SNIa X(cid:20) σ (cid:21)
i
0 i=1
Obviously, with the aid of the latter approach we include
where a = (1 + z ) 1 is the observed scale factor of the
i i −
any modification to the Friedmann equation of general
Universe, z is the observed redshift, µ is the distance
i
relativity in the last term of eq.(4). Now from eqs.(3,
modulus µ = m M = 5logd + 25 and d (a,p) is
L L
4) we can derive, after some algebra, the “geometrical” −
the luminosity distance d (a,p) = c 1 dy where c
dark energy equation of state L a a y2H(y)
is the speed of light. We can combineRthe above probes
1 dlnδH2 by using a joint likelihood analysis: (p) =
tot BAO
w(a) = 1 . (5) L L ×
or χ2 (p) = χ2 +χ2 +χ2 in order
− − 3 dlna cmb SNIa tot BAO cmb SNIa
L ×L
to put even further constraints on the parameter space
From now on, for the modified cosmological models we
used. Note, that we define the likelihood estimator 1 as:
will use the above formulation.
exp[ χ2/2].
j j
L ∝ −
3. LIKELIHOOD ANALYSIS
4. CONSTRAINTS ON THE FLAT DARK
ENERGY MODELS
We will use various cosmological observations in order
to constrain the dark energy models described in section
In this section, we consider a large family of flat dark
4. First of all, we use the Baryonic Acoustic Oscilla-
energy models and with the aid of the above cosmologi-
tions (BAOs). BAOs are produced by pressure (acoustic)
cally relevant observational data, we attempt to put tight
waves in the photon-baryon plasma in the early universe,
constraints on their free parameters. In the following
generated by dark matter overdensities. Evidence of this
subsections, we briefly present these cosmological mod-
excess was recently found in the clustering properties of
els which trace differently the nature of the dark energy.
the luminous SDSS red-galaxies (Eisenstein et al. 2005;
Padmanabhan et al. 2007) and it can provide a “stan-
dard ruler” with which we can constraint the dark energy
4.1. Constant equation of state - QP model
models. In particular, we use the following estimator:
2/3
A(p) = √Ω m 1 da , measured from the In this case the equation of state is constant (see for
[z2E(a )]1/3 a a2E(a)
s s h s i a review, Peebles & Ratra 2003; hereafter QP-models).
SDSS data to be A =R0.469 0.017, where z = 0.35 [or
s
± Such dark energy models do not have much physical mo-
a = (1 + z ) 1 0.75]. Therefore, the corresponding
s s −
≃ tivation. In particular, a constant equation of state pa-
χ2 function is simply written
BAO rameter requires a fine tuning of the potential and ki-
[A(p) 0.469]2 netic energies of the real scalar field. Despite the lat-
χ2 (p) = − (6)
ter problem, these dark energy models have been used
BAO 0.0172
in the literature due to their simplicity. Notice that
where p is a vector containing the cosmological parame-
dark energy models with a canonical kinetic term have
ters that we want to fit.
1 w < 1/3. On the other hand, models of phantom
− ≤ −
On the other hand, a very accurate and deep geo-
dark energy (w < 1) require exotic nature, such as a
−
metrical probe of dark energy is the angular scale of
the sound horizon at the last scattering surface as en-
coded in the location lTT of the first peak of the Cos-
1
mic Microwave Background (CMB) temperature per- 1
Likelihoods are normalized to their maximum values. Note, that
turbation spectrum. This probe is described by the thestep ofsamplingis0.01 andthe errorsofthefitted parameters
CMB shift parameter (Bond, Efstathiou & Tegmark, represent 2σ uncertainties. Note that the overall number of data
points used is Ntot = 309 and the degrees of freedom: dof =
1997; Nesseris & Perivolaropoulos 2007) and is defined
Ntot − nfit, with nfit the number of fitted parameters, which
as R = √Ω 1 da . The shift parameter measured
m a a2E(a) vary for the different models.
ls
R

3
scalar field with a negative kinetic energy. Now using The normalized Hubble parameter is given by (see eq.2):
eq.(2) the normalized Hubble parameter becomes
E2(a) = Ω a 3+(1 Ω )a 3(1+w0+w1)e3w1(a 1) , (13)
m − m − −
−
E2(a) = Ω a 3 + (1 Ω )a 3(1+w) . (9)
m − m −
− where w and w are constants. We sample the un-
0 1
known parameters as follows: w [ 2, 0.4] and w
Comparing the QP-models with the observational data 0 1
∈ − − ∈
[ 2.6,2.6]. We find that for the prior of Ω = 0.28 the
(we sample Ω [0.1,1] and w [ 2, 0.4]) we find m
m −
∈ ∈ − − overall likelihood function peaks at w = 1.1+0.22 and
that the best fit values are Ω m = 0.28 0.02 and 0 − 0.16
w = 1.02 0.06 with χ2 (Ω ,w)/dof ± 309.2/307 w = 0.60+0.62 while the corresponding χ2 (w ,− w )/dof
tot m 1 1.54 tot 0 1
in ver− y good± agreement with the 5 years W≃ MAP data is 307.6/3−07.
Komatsu et al. (2009). Also Davis et al. (2007) utilizing
the Essence-SNIa+BAO+CMB and a Bayesian statis-
4.4. The low Ricci dark energy - LRDE model
tics found Ω = 0.27 0.04, while Kowalski et al.
m
±
(2008) using the Union08-SNIa+BAO+CMB obtained
Ω 0.285+0.03. Obviously, our results coincide within In this modified cosmological model, we use a sim-
m 0.03
≃
1σ errors. I−t is worth noting that the concordance Λ- ple parametrization for the Ricci scalar which is based
cosmology can be described by QP models with w strictly on a Taylor expansion around the present time: =
R
equal to -1. In this case we find: Ω = 0.28 0.02 with r + r (1 a) [for more details see Linder 2004]. It is
m 0 1
± −
χ2 (Ω )/dof 309.3/308. interesting to point that at the early epochs the cosmic
tot m
≃
evolution tends asymptotically to be matter dominated.
In this framework, we have
4.2. The Braneworld Gravity - BRG model
a4(r0+r1 1)e4r1(1 a) a a
E2(a) = − − ≥ t (14)
(cid:26) Ω a 3 a < a
In the context of a braneworld cosmology (hereafter m − t
BRG) the accelerated expansion of the universe can be
where a = 1 (1 4r )/4r . The matter density pa-
t 0 1
explained by a modification of gravity in which gravity − −
rameter at the present epoch, is related with the above
itself becomes weak at very large distances (close to the
4r0+4r1 1
constants via Ω = 4r0 4r1 1 − e1 4r0. The
Hubble scale) due to the fact that our four dimensional m − − −
4r1
(cid:16) (cid:17)
brane survives into an extra dimensional manifold (Def- equation of state parameter that corresponds to the cur-
fayet, Dvali, & Cabadadze 2002). The interesting point rent geometrical dark energy model is given by
in this scenario is that the corresponding functional form
1 4 1
of the normalized Hubble flow, eq. (4), is affected only w(a) = − R 1 Ω me −R a1 (1 −4 R)(dy/y) − . (15)
by one free parameter (Ω ). Notice, that the quantity 3 −
m h i
δH2 is given by
Note, that we sample the unknown parameters as follows:
r [0.5,1.5] and r [ 2.4, 0.1] and here are the
δH2 = 2Ω + 2 Ω Ω a 3 + Ω , (10) 0 ∈ 1 ∈ − −
bw bw m − bw results: r = 0.82 0.04 and r = 0.74+0.10 (Ω
0 1 0.08 m
p p 0.28) with χ2 (r ,r± )/dof 309.8/30− 7. − ≃
where Ω = (1 Ω )2/4. The geometrical dark energy tot 0 1 ≃
bw m
−
equation of state parameter (see eq.5) reduces to
4.5. The high Ricci dark energy - HRDE model
1
w(a) = , (11)
−1 + Ω (a)
m
A different than the previously described geometrical
method was defined by Linder & Cahn (2007), in which
where Ω (a) Ω a 3/E2(a). The joint likelihood anal-
m m −
≡ the Ricci scalar at high redshifts evolves as
ysis provides a best fit value of Ω = 0.24 0.02, but the
m
±
fit is rather poor χ2 (Ω )/dof 369/308.
tot m ≃ 1 δH2
1 3w , (16)
1
R ≃ 4 (cid:20) − H2 (cid:21)
4.3. The parametric Dark Energy model - CPL
where δH2 = E2(a) Ω a 3. In this geometrical pattern
m −
model −
the normalized Hubble flow becomes:
lnΩ /ln(1+β)
In this model we use the Chevalier-Polarski-Linder E2(a) = Ω a 3 1 + βa 3w1 − m , (17)
m − −
(Chevallier & Polarski 2001; Linder 2003, hereafter CPL) (cid:0) (cid:1)
parametrization. The dark energy equation of state where β = Ω 1 1. Using the same sampling as in the
−m
−
parameter is defined as a first order Taylor expansion QP-models, the joint likelihood peaks at Ω = 0.28
m
±
around the present epoch: 0.03 and w = 1.02 0.1 with χ2 (Ω ,w )/dof
1 tot m 1
− ± ≃
309.2/307. To this end, the effective equation of state
w(a) = w + w (1 a) . (12) parameter is related to E(a) according to eq.(3).
0 1
−

4
4.6. The tension of cosmological magnetic fields - The basic assumption here is that at early epochs the
TCM model amount of dark energy is not negligible (Doran, Stern &
Thommes 2006 and references therein). In this model,
Recently, Contopoulos & Basilakos (2007) proposed a the total dark energy component is given by:
novel idea which is based on the following consideration
1 Ω Ω (1 a 3w0)
(hereafter TCM): if the cosmic magnetic field is gener- Ω (a) = − m − e − − + Ω (1 a 3w0) ,
X e −
ated in sources (such as galaxy clusters) whose overall 1 Ω Ω a3w0 −
m m
− −
dimensions remain unchanged during the expansion of (23)
the Universe, the stretching of this field by the cosmic where Ω is the early dark energy density and w is the
e 0
expansion generates a tension (negative pressure) that equation of state parameter at the present epoch. Notice,
could possibly explain a small fraction of the dark en- that the EDE model was designed to simultaneously (a)
ergy ( 5 10%). In this flat cosmological scenario the mimic the effects of the late dark energy and (b) provide
∼ −
normalized Hubble flow becomes: a decelerated expansion of the universe at high redshifts.
The normalized Hubble parameter is written as:
E2(a) = Ω a 3 + Ω + Ω a 3+n , (18)
m − Λ B −
Ω a 3
E2(a) = m − , (24)
where Ω is the density parameter for the cosmic mag-
B 1 Ω (a)
X
netic fields and Ω = 1 Ω Ω . The equation of −
Λ m B
− −
state parameter which is related to magnetic tension is
while using eq.(3), we can obtain the equation of state
(see eq.3)
parameter as a function of the scale factor. From the
joint likelihood analysis we find that Ω = 0.05 0.04
3Ω Λ + nΩ Ba −3+n +0.18 e ±
w(a) = . (19) and w = 1.14 (for the prior of Ω = 0.28) with
−3(Ω + Ω a 3+n) 0 − 0.10 m
Λ B − χ2 (Ω ,w )/dof− 308.7/307.
tot e 0
≃
To this end, we sample Ω [0,0.3] and n [0,10]
B
∈ ∈
and we find that for the prior of Ω = 0.28 the best
m
fit values are: Ω = 0.10 0.10 and n = 3.60+4.5 with 4.9. The Variable Chaplygin Gas - VCG model
B 2.6
±
χ2 (Ω ,n)/dof 308.9/307. −
tot B
≃
Let us consider now a completely different model
namely the variable Chaplygin gas (hereafter VCG)
4.7. The Pseudo-Nambu Goldstone boson - PNGB
which corresponds to a Born-Infeld tachyon action
model
(Bento, Bertolami & Sen 2004). Recently, an interesting
family of Chaplygin gas models was found to be consis-
In this cosmological model the dark energy equation tent with the current observational data (Dev, Alcaniz &
of state parameter is expressed with the aid the poten- Jain 2003). In the framework of a spatially flat geome-
tial V (φ) [1 + cos(φ/F)] (Abrahamse et al 2008 and try, it can be shown that the normalized Hubble function
∝
references therein): takes the following formula:
w(a) = 1 + (1 + w )aF , (20)
0 E2(a) = Ω a 3+(1 Ω ) B a 6 + (1 B )a n , (25)
− b − b s − s −
− −
p
where w [ 2, 0.4] and F [0,8]. In case of a 1
0 ∈ − − ∈ ≪ where Ω 0.021h 2 is the density parameter for the
we get w(a) 1. Based on this parametrization the b −
≃
−→ − baryonic matter (see Kirkman et al. 2003) and B
normalized Hubble function is given by s
∈
[0.01,0.51] and n [ 4,4]. The effective matter density
∈ −
E2(a) = Ω ma −3 + (1 Ω m)ρ X(a) . (21) parameter is: Ωe mff = Ω b+(1 −Ω b)√B s. We find that the
− +0.35
best fit parameters are B = 0.05 0.02and n = 1.58
s 0.43
±
In this context, the corresponding dark energy density is (Ωeff 0.26) with χ2 (B ,n)/dof 314.7/307. −
m tot s
≃ ≃
3(1 + w )
ρ (a) = exp 0 (1 aF) . (22)
X
(cid:20) F − (cid:21)
5. EVOLUTION OF MATTER
PERTURBATIONS
Notice, that the likelihood function peaks at w =
0
1.04 0.17 and F = 5.9 3.2 with χ2 (w ,F)/dof
tot 0
− ± ± ≃
317/307. The evolution equation of the growth factor for models
where the dark energy fluid has a vanishing anisotropic
stress and the matter fluid is not coupled to other matter
4.8. The early dark energy - EDE model species is given by (Linder & Jenkins 2003)
′
Another cosmological scenario that we include in our ′′ 3 w(a) D 3 X(a) D
D + 1 = 0 , (26)
paper is the early dark energy model (hereafter EDE). 2 (cid:20) − 1 + X(a)(cid:21) a − 2 1 + X(a) a2

5
where universe contained in gravitationally bound structures
(such as galaxy clusters) with matter fluctuations greater
Ω Ω a 3
X(a) = m e 3R1 w(y)dlny = m − . (27) than a critical value δ c, which is the linearly extrapolated
− a
1 Ω δH2 density threshold above which structures collapse (Eke,
m
−
Cole & Frenk 1996). Assuming that the density con-
Note, that the prime denotes derivatives with respect to
trast is normally distributed with zero mean and variance
the scale factor. Useful expressions of the growth factor
σ2(M,z) we have:
can be found for the ΛCDM cosmology in Peebles (1993),
for dark energy models with w = const in Silveira, &
Waga (1994) for dark energy models with a time vary- 1 δ2
(δ,z) = exp . (28)
ing equation of state in Linder & Cahn (2007) and for
P √2πσ(M,z) (cid:20)−2σ2(M,z)(cid:21)
the scalar tensor models in Gannouji & Polarski (2008).
In this work the growth factor evolution for the current
cosmological model is derived by solving numerically eq.
In this kind of studies it is common to parametrize the
(26). Note, that the growth factors are normalized to
rms mass fluctuation amplitude at 8 h 1Mpc which can
−
unity at the present time.
be expressed as a function of redshift as σ(M,z) =
σ (z) = D(z)σ . The current cosmological models are
8 8
normalized by the analysis of the WMAP 5 years data
5.1. The formation of galaxy clusters
σ = 0.80 (Komatsu et al. 2009). The integration of
8
eq.(28) provides the fraction of the universe, on some
In this section we briefly investigate the cluster forma- specific mass scale, that has already collapsed producing
tion processes by generalizing the basic equations which cosmic structures (galaxy clusters) at redshift z and is
govern the behavior of the matter perturbations within given by Richstone et al. (1992):
the framework of the current dark energy models. Also
we compare our predictions with those found for the tra-
1 δ
ditional Λ cosmology. This can help us understand better ∞ c
P(z) = (δ,z)dδ = 1 erf .
the theoretical expectations of the dark energy models as Z P 2 (cid:20) − (cid:18)√2σ (z)(cid:19)(cid:21)
δ 8
c
well as the variants from the usual Λ cosmology. (29)
Notice, that for the model of modified gravity (BRG)
we use δ 1.47 (see Schafer & Koyama 2008), for the
c
≃
EDE model we use δ 1.4 (see Bartelmann, Doran &
c
≃
Wetterich 2006). For the rest of the dark energy models,
due to the fact that w 1 close to the present epoch,
≃ −
we utilize a δ approximation which is given by Weinberg
c
& Kamionkowski (2003 see their eq.18).
Obviously the above generic form of eq.(29) depends
on the choice of the background cosmology. The next
step is to normalize the probability to give the number
of clusters which have already collapsed by the epoch z
(cumulative distribution), divided by the number of clus-
ters which have collapsed at the present epoch (z = 0),
F(z) = P(z)/P(0). In figure 1 we present, in a logarith-
FIG. 1: The predicted fractional rate of cluster formation
mic scale, the behavior of normalized cluster formation
as a function of redshift for the current cosmological models
σ . rate as a function of redshift for the various dark energy
( 8 = 0 80). The points represent the following cosmological
models: (a) BRG (open stars), (b) LRDE (open squares), (c) models. In general, prior to z 0.2 the cluster formation
∼
TCM (open triangles), (d) EDE (open circles) and (e) PNGB has terminated due to the fact that the matter fluctua-
(solid triangles). The lines represent: (a) CPL model (long tion field, D(z), effectively freezes. For the traditional Λ
dashed), (b) HRDE model (dot line) and VCG model (dashed cosmology we find the known behavior in which galaxy
line).
clusters appear to be formed at high redshifts z 2
∼
(Basilakos 2003; Basilakos, Sanchez & Perivolaropoulos
The concept of estimating the fractional rate of clus- 2009 and references therein). From figure 1 it becomes
ter formation has been proposed by different authors (eg., also clear, that the vast majority of the dark energy mod-
Weinberg 1987; Richstone, Loeb & Turner 1992). In par- els seem to have a cluster formation rate which is close to
ticular, these authors introduced a methodology which that predicted by the usual Λ cosmology (see solid line
computes the rate at which mass joins virialized struc- in figure 1). However, for the BRG and EDE cosmologi-
tures, which grow from small initial perturbations in the cal scenarios we find that galaxy clusters appear to form
universe. The basic tool is the Press & Schechter (1974) earlier (z 3) than in the CPL, LRDE, HRDE, TCM,
∼
formalism which considers the fraction of mass in the PNGB and VCG dark energy models.

6
6. CONCLUSIONS tional data (SNIa, CMB shift parameter and BAOs), and
we put tight constraints on the main cosmological param-
eters. We also find that for the vast majority of the dark
In this work we have studied analytically and numer-
energy models, the large scale structures (such as galaxy
ically the overall dynamics of the universe for a large
concrdance clusters) start to form prior to z 1 2.
number of dark energy models beyond the
∼ −
Λ cosmology, by using several parameterizations for the Acknowledgments. For this paper, I have benefited
dark energy equation of state. We performed a joint like- from discussions with L.Perivolaropoulos and M. Plionis.
lihood analysis, using the current high-quality observa- Therefore, I would like to thank both of them.
[1] Bartelmann M., Doran M., & Wetterich C., 2006, A& A, [16] Eke V., Cole S., & Frenk C. S., 1996, MNRAS, 282, 263
454, 27 [17] Gannouji R., & Polarski D., 2008, [arXiv:0802.4196]
[2] Basilakos S., 2003, ApJ, 590, 636 [18] Kirkman, D. et al., 2003, ApJS, 149, 1
[3] Basilakos S., Sanchez J. C. B., & L. Perivolaropoulos, [19] Komatsu E., et al., 2009, ApJS, 180, 330
2009, Phys. Rev. D., 80, 3530 [20] Kowalski M., et al., 2008, ApJ, 686, 749
[4] Abrahamse A., Albrecht A., Bernard M. &, Bozek B., [21] Linder E. V., 2003, Phys. Rev. Let., 90, 091301
2008 Phys. Rev. D., 77, 103504 [22] Linder E. V., & Jenkins A., 2003, MNRAS, 346, 573
[5] Bond, R. J., Efstathiou G. &, Tegmark M., 1997, MN- [23] Linder E. V., 2004, Phys.Rev. Let., 70, 023511
RAS, 291, L33 [24] Linder E. V., & Cahn R. N., 2007, Astrop. Phys., 28, 481
[6] Bento M. C., Bertolami O., & Sen A. A., 2004, Phys. [25] Nesseris, S.,& Perivolaropoulos, L., 2007, JCAP, 0701,
Rev. D., 70, 083519 018
[7] Caldwell R. R., & Kamionkowski, M., 2009, ARNPS, 59, [26] Padmanabhan N., et al., 2007, MNRAS, 378, 852
397 [27] Peebles, P. J.,E., 1993, Principles of Physical Cosmology,
[8] Copeland E. J., Sami, M., & Tsujikawa, S., 2006, IJMPD, Princeton University Press, Princeton New Jersey
15, 11 [28] Peebles, P.J.E.,& Ratra, B., 2003, Rev.Mod.Phys., 75,
[9] Chevallier M., & Polarski D., 2001, IJMPD, 10, 213 559
[10] Contopoulos I., & Basilakos S., 2007, A&A, 471, 59 [29] Press W. H., & Schechter P., 1974, ApJ, 187, 425
[11] Davis T. M., et al., 2007, ApJ, 666, 716 [30] Richstone D., Loeb A., &, Turner E. L., 1992, ApJ, 393,
[12] Deffayet C., Dvali G., & Cabadadze G., 2002, Phys. Rev. 477
D., 65, 044023 [31] Schafer B. M., & Koyama K., 2008, MNRAS, 385, 411
[13] Dev A., Alcaniz J. S., & Jain D., 2003, Phys. Rev. D., [32] Silveira V., & Waga I., 1994, Phys. Rev. D., 64, 4890
67, 3514 [33] Weinberg S., 1987, Phys. Rev. Lett., 59, 2607
[14] Doran M., Stern S., & Thommes E., 2006, JCAP, 0704, [34] Weinberg N. N., & Kamionkowski M., 2003, ApJ, 341,
015 251
[15] Eisenstein D.J., et al., 2005, ApJ, 633, 560