quicksilver
A simple 2D game framework written in pure Rust, for both the Web and Desktop
Maintenance Status
I’ve posted an update on my website about Quicksilver. To keep a long story short: Quicksilver is no
longer actively developed. For now I will continue to triage bugs and pull requests and (maybe) fix
small bugs.
Alpha Notice
This version of Quicksilver is currently working its way through alpha! There is still work to do on the
API and on bugfixes, as well as waiting on an upstream library for audio support. Please feel free to
usethisversionandprovidefeedback! IfyourunintobugsorwanttogivefeedbackonAPIdecisions,
please open an issue.
A quick example
Create a rust project and add this line to your Cargo.toml file under [dependencies]:
1 quicksilver = "0.4"
Then replace src/main.rs with the following (the contents of quicksilver’s examples/01
_square.rs):
1 // Example 1: The Square
2 // Open a window, and draw a colored square in it
3 use quicksilver::{
4 geom::{Rectangle, Vector},
5 graphics::Color,
6 run, Graphics, Input, Result, Settings, Window,
7 };
1

| 1 // Example 1: The Square                          |
|:----------------------------------------------------|
| 2 // Open a window, and draw a colored square in it |
| 3 use quicksilver::{                                |
| 4 geom::{Rectangle, Vector},                        |
| 5 graphics::Color,                                  |
| 6 run, Graphics, Input, Result, Settings, Window,   |
| 7 };                                                |

8
9 fn main() {
10 run(
11 Settings {
12 title: "Square Example",
13 ..Settings::default()
14 },
15 app,
16 );
17 }
18
19 async fn app(window: Window, mut gfx: Graphics, mut input: Input) ->
Result<()> {
20 // Clear the screen to a blank, white color
21 gfx.clear(Color::WHITE);
22 // Paint a blue square with a red outline in the center of our
screen
23 // It should have a top-left of (350, 100) and a size of (150, 100)
24 let rect = Rectangle::new(Vector::new(350.0, 100.0), Vector::new
(100.0, 100.0));
25 gfx.fill_rect(&rect, Color::BLUE);
26 gfx.stroke_rect(&rect, Color::RED);
27 // Send the data to be drawn
28 gfx.present(&window)?;
29 loop {
30 while let Some(_) = input.next_event().await {}
31 }
32 }
Learning Quicksilver
AgoodwaytogetstartedwithQuicksilveristoreadandruntheexampleswhichalsoserveastutorials.
Ifyouhaveanyquestions,feelfreetoopenanissueoraskforhelpintheRustCommunityDiscordfrom
other Quicksilver users and developers.
Made with Quicksilver
Version 0.4
• Libraries
– Lenscas: Silver_Animation ‑ An animation system
– Lenscas: Mergui ‑ A simple GUI system
– johnpmayer: quicksilver‑utils‑async ‑ Tasks, timers, and net code
– johnpmayer: quicksilver‑utils‑ecs ‑ Entity Component System integrations
2

| 8                                                                       |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 9 fn main() {                                                           |
| 10 run(                                                                 |
| 11 Settings {                                                           |
| 12 title: "Square Example",                                             |
| 13 ..Settings::default()                                                |
| 14 },                                                                   |
| 15 app,                                                                 |
| 16 );                                                                   |
| 17 }                                                                    |
| 18                                                                      |
| 19 async fn app(window: Window, mut gfx: Graphics, mut input: Input) -> |
| Result<()> {                                                            |
| 20 // Clear the screen to a blank, white color                          |
| 21 gfx.clear(Color::WHITE);                                             |
| 22 // Paint a blue square with a red outline in the center of our       |
| screen                                                                  |
| 23 // It should have a top-left of (350, 100) and a size of (150, 100)  |
| 24 let rect = Rectangle::new(Vector::new(350.0, 100.0), Vector::new     |
| (100.0, 100.0));                                                        |
| 25 gfx.fill_rect(&rect, Color::BLUE);                                   |
| 26 gfx.stroke_rect(&rect, Color::RED);                                  |
| 27 // Send the data to be drawn                                         |
| 28 gfx.present(&window)?;                                               |
| 29 loop {                                                               |
| 30 while let Some(_) = input.next_event().await {}                      |
| 31 }                                                                    |
| 32 }                                                                    |

• Games
– alec‑deason: Pixel Imperfect
Version 0.3
• Documentation / Tutorials
– tomassedovic: quicksilver‑roguelike
• Games
– WushuWorks: I am the Elder God
– codec‑abc: RustyVolley
– rickyhan: Kingston Crabfight Simulator
– robotcaleb: Replay
– rsribeiro: Evil Alligator
– nycex: Axosnake
– Leinnan: Slavic Castles
– Lenscas: Arena keeper
• Libraries
– Lenscas: Mergui ‑ A simple GUI system
Want to add your project? Feel free to open an issue or PR!
Building and Deploying a Quicksilver application
QuicksilvershouldalwayscompileandrunonthelateststableversionofRust,forbothwebanddesk‑
top.
Make sure to put all your assets in a top‑level folder of your crate called static/. All Quicksilver file
loading‑APIs will expect paths that originate in the static folder, so static/image.png should be
referenced as image.png.
Linux dependencies
On Windows and Mac, all you’ll need to build Quicksilver is a recent stable version of rustc and
cargo. A few of Quicksilver’s dependencies require Linux packages to build, namely libudev,
zlib, and alsa. To install these on Ubuntu or Debian, run the command sudo apt install
libudev-dev zlib1g-dev alsa libasound2-dev.
3

Deploying for desktop
If you’re deploying for desktop platforms, build in release mode (cargo build --release) and
copy the executable file produced (found at “target/release/”) and any assets you used (image files,
etc.) and create an archive (on Windows a zip file, on Unix a tar file). You should be able to distribute
this archive with no problems; if there are any, please open an issue.
Deploying for the web
If you’re deploying for the web, first make sure you’ve installed the cargo web tool. Then use cargo
web deploy to build your application for distribution (located at target/deploy).
Ifyouwanttotestyourapplicationlocally,usecargo web start --features quicksilver
/stdweb and open your favorite browser to the port it provides.
wasm‑bindgen support Quicksilver has recently gained experimental support for wasm-
bindgen, under the web-sys feature. The workflow is not currently documented here, but it
should be the same as using any other library with wasm-bindgen.
Optional Features
Quicksilver by default tries to provide all features a 2D application may need, but not all applications
need these features.
Theoptionalfeaturesavailableare: ‑easylogging(vialog,simple_logger,andweb_logger)‑gamepad
event generation (via gilrs) ‑ saving (via gestalt) ‑ font rendering (via elefont) and TTF parsing (via
rusttype)
Each are enabled by default, but you can specify which features you actually want to use.
Supported Platforms
The engine is supported on Windows, macOS, Linux, and the web via WebAssembly.
Mobile support would be a future possibility, but likely only through external contributions.
4