 International Journa l of Education, Information Technology and 
Others (IJEIT) 
https://jurnal.unibrah.ac.id/index.php/IJEIT 
Vol. 3, No.2, Agustus 2020 
 
THE EVALUATION OF THREE ENGLISH LEARNING WEBSITES 
 
Tahan HJ. Sihombing 
 
Lecturer at Institut Teknologi Del 
Email: tahan.sihombing@del.ac.id 
Article Info  Abstract:   
Article History:  With  the  growing  use  of  internet,  a  large  number  of  English 
Received: June 19, 2020  learning websites have been developed to assist English learners 
Revised:  July 12, 2020  
to improve their English. However, the websites do not always 
Published: August 1, 2020 
match  the  learners’  need,  learners’  interests,  and  learners’ 
e-ISSN: 2623-2324 
characteristic.  Hence,  it  is  essential  for  English  teachers  to 
p-ISSN: 2654-2528 
evaluate the English learning websites before they recommend 
DOI:  
them  to  their  students.  The  present  study  evaluated  three 
language learning websites focusing on listening. Three major 
criteria including design, content, and learner fit were used as the 
parameters in the present evaluation. It is expected that, upon the 
evaluation, English language learners can be assisted to choose 
the  best  website  for  their  English  learning.  In  addition,  this 
evaluation can contribute to the development of the language 
learning websites in which the feedback from the evaluation can 
be incorporated to the better development of the websites.  
Keywords:  English learning websites, technology, website 
evaluation, English learners 
 
INTRODUCTION 
The extensive use of internet has led to the emergence of language learning websites 
that aim to assist language learners, especially English. It is expected that the language learning 
websites can help the learners achieve their mastery of the language they learn. In Indonesia, 
English is considered as a foreign language, meaning that English is not an everyday language. 
As a result, English is rarely heard by Indonesian English learners outside of their school. In 
order to gain enough exposure of English, the learners might utilize the abundance of English 
websites. These English websites, however, do not always fit the learners’ characteristics. As 
a result, learners might find them ineffective and may feel discouraged in using the website. 
An evaluation of the available English websites is then necessary to ensure that the learners are 
240 
 

| With the growing use of internet, a large number of English          |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| learning websites have been developed to assist English learners     |
| to improve their English. However, the websites do not always        |
| match the learners’ need, learners’ interests, and learners’         |
| characteristic. Hence, it is essential for English teachers to       |
| evaluate the English learning websites before they recommend         |
| them to their students. The present study evaluated three            |
| language learning websites focusing on listening. Three major        |
| criteria including design, content, and learner fit were used as the |
| parameters in the present evaluation. It is expected that, upon the  |
| evaluation, English language learners can be assisted to choose      |
| the best website for their English learning. In addition, this       |
| evaluation can contribute to the development of the language         |
| learning websites in which the feedback from the evaluation can      |
| be incorporated to the better development of the websites.           |

learning  English  on  the  appropriate  websites.  This  study  aimed  to  evaluate  three  English 
websites focusing on improving learners’ listening skills.  
The use of technology including language websites in language learning has attracted many 
scholars to investigate whether the technology is effective for language learning. In fact, a 
number of scholars view that technology can be a significant part in language learning. Bull and 
Ma (2001), for example, view that technology provides limitless resources to the learners of 
language. Genclter (2015) states, that in order to be successful in language learning, learners 
should  be  encouraged  by  teachers  to  discover  language  learning  activities  by  utilizing 
technology. Similarly, Clements and Sarama (2003) argues that language learners can gain 
advantages from appropriate technological materials. Likewise, Harmer (2007) suggests that the 
use of computer-based language activities contributes to the level of learners’ engagement in 
group learning.  
Other scholars also support the use of technology in language learning. Tomlinson (2009), 
for example, state that technology-based activities offer language learners fast information and 
suitable materials. He adds that technology encourage learners to study more. Furthermore, 
Larsen-Freeman  and  Anderson  (2011)  agree  with  the  idea  that  technology  offer  learning 
resources  to  the  learners  and  provide  them  with  great  learning  experience.  By  utilizing 
technology, learners can have authentic materials so that they can get more excited in learning 
the language.  
Apart from the views agreeing the use of technology in language learning, a few studies have 
shown the merits of using technology in language learning. A study by Lee (2001) showed that 
changes in leaners’ language attitudes occur after the utilization of Computer Assisted Language 
Learning in which leaners’ self confidence in learning the language improved. Similar findings 
also come from Baytak, Tarman, and Ayas’ study (2011), indicating that learners found it 
fascinating and motivating when learning through technology. Another study by Gillespie (2006) 
indicated that, in doing tasks, learners tended to be more collaborative. Parvin and Salam (2015) 
in their study  found that  language learning technology  facilitated  learners  in  gaining  more 
exposure to the language being learned in a meaningful context and learning independently. 
Furthermore, Gorjian (2011) found that the use of web-based language learning in teaching 
English vocabulary had significant effect on students’ mastery of English vocabulary. 
While studies and views above indicate that the use of technology in language learning 
facilitate  learners  in  learning  the  language,  the  characteristics  of  technology  and  learners’ 
context have not been extensively touched. One technology might be efficient and appropriate 
for  a  certain  group  of  language  learners.  Other  group  learners,  however,  might  find  it 
inappropriate as it might not suit their language learning need. It is, therefore, necessary to 
evaluate a technology before offering or recommending it to language learners. A language 
website, for example, might provide learners with useful input for the learners. How effective 
and appropriate this website for a certain group of language learner needs evaluating. Indeed, 
Dragulanescu (2002) suggest that it is essential to conduct assessment on webpages and to assess 
if  those  websites  meet  learners’  needs  and  characteristics.  In  addition,  Premaratne  (2012) 
maintains that a website does not always meet learners’ interest, leaners’ need, and learners’ 
characteristics. Furthermore, Gotwald (2002) in his study found that the content of websites 
designed for second language research required improvements.  
241 
 

According to scholars interested in the use of language learning websites in language learning, 
a language website should be well developed in order to meet learners’ needs (Hubbard, 2006; 
Rost, 2007; Son, 2005). According to these scholars, there are a number of aspects of a language 
website that need to be evaluated including the design, the content, and the learners’ fit.  
In terms of the design, it is said that a language technology will be extensively adopted if the 
technology is both meaningful and emotionally appealing (Norman, as cited in Rost, 2007). 
Similarly, Rost (2007) suggests that if leaners do not find it fascinating when using the language 
technology, leaners will tend to avoid using it no matter how logically useful the technology is. 
According to Son (2005), a website design can be evaluated in three aspects including the 
organization,  navigation,  and  multimedia.  He  adds  that  a  language  website  has  to  be  well 
organized,  be  appealing  to  see  and  explore,  and  own  effective  screen  displays.  Regarding 
navigation, he mentions that a website needs to be easily navigated, meaning that there should 
not be complex instructions on the website. In terms of multimedia, he mentions that the sounds, 
graphics, and colors of the website should have good quality.  
In relation to the content of the website, there are a number of aspects that need to be 
incorporated. They are the authenticity of the materials, interactivity, feedback, reliability, and 
accuracy. What is meant by authenticity here is that the website should provide the learners with 
natural-everyday language so that real-life use of the language can be experienced by them. 
Interactivity and feedback deal with the pedagogical aspects and the process of second language 
acquisition. When the website is interactive, learners have the chance to practice their English 
as  they will  have  input from the  website (Ellis and Sintani, 2004).  The  availability  of the 
feedback in the website is also crucial since feedback is found to be effective in acquiring the 
language being learned (Ellis and Sintani, 2004). In terms of reliability, Son (2005) mentions 
that the website needs to be free of dead links, breaks, and bugs. This is essential because there 
should not be any distractions for the learners during the learning. With regards to accuracy, the 
spellings and grammars in the website need to be accurate to prevent students from obtaining 
incorrect input for their learning.  
The last aspect that should get attention is the learner’s fit. Learners’ fit deals with the how 
well the website fit in the characteristics and needs of the learners (Hubbard, 2006). In other 
words, a language website should consider learners’ interests, learners’ cultures, age, sex, and 
leaners’ proficiency level.  
RESEARCH METHOD  
The procedure of evaluation 
The followings were the stages of evaluating the language website: 
1.  Designing the instrument.   
In this stage, the instruments used to evaluate the websites were developed based on the 
existing literatures 
2.  Choosing the websites to evaluate. 
In this stage, three websites were chosen based on three criteria. First, the website was 
specifically designed for teachers and learners. Second, it was specifically designed for 
English learning, not other languages. Third, the website should focus on listening skills.  
242 
 

3.  Evaluating the websites using the instruments 
4.  Analyzing the results obtained from the instrument.  
Instrument 
The instrument used in this study was a checklist consisting of 24 statements regarding the 
apects  of  the  websites  being  evaluated  ((10  statement  for  design;  10  statements  for 
content/teacher fit; and 5 statements for learners’ fit) in the form of Likert-sclae (1 =strongly 
disagree to 5 = strongly agree). These 24 statements were developed based on the existing 
literature (Hubbard, 2006; Son, 2005; Rost, 2007). The instrument also included an open-
comment section where the evaluator could give more perspectives on the website.  
The materials (the websites) 
The websites evaluated in this study were: 
1. http://www.elllo.org/ 
2. http://whttp://www.eslradioandtv.com 
3. ww.real-english.com/new-lessons.htm 
The raters/evaluators  
Two teachers with master’s degree in TESOL were the raters in this study.  These teachers 
have had over five years teaching experience. 
Data analysis 
The data obtaining from the checklist were manually analyzed in which the average scores 
for each aspect of the evaluation and overall evaluation (the combination of all aspects) were 
counted. The average scores were then interpreted using a set of criteria. The average score of 
1.1  –  2.0  was  interpreted  as  poor  (not  appropriate).  The  average  scores  of  2.1-3.0  were 
interpreted adequate (acceptable with reservation). The average scores with 3.1-4.0 were good 
(appropriate for use). The average scores with 4.1-5.0 were interpreted as excellent (highly 
recommended).  
The  data  obtained  from  the  open-comment  section  were  analyzed  through  qualitative 
content analysis including highlighting segments related to teachers’ evaluation of the website, 
giving initial code to the segments, examining the codes, and grouping them into themes.  
 
 
 
 
RESEARCH RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
The raters’s reponses to the checklist  
1. http://www.elllo.org/ 
 
243 
 

Categories  Average scores 
Design  4 
Content/Teacher fit  3.6 
Learner Fit  4 
Overall  3.9 
Fig. 1. The average scores of www.ello.org 
Figure 1 shows the average scores of the aspects evaluated on www.ello.org. In terms of 
design, the average score was 4, indicating that the design was considered good or appropriate 
to use. In term of content/teacher fit, the average score was 3.6, indicating that that the content 
of the website was appropriate to use. Regarding leaner fit, the average score was 4, also 
indicating that the website fitted the learners’ characteristics. The overall average score was 
3.9, indicating that the website was considered good for English listening learning.  
2. http://whttp://www.eslradioandtv.com 
 
Categories  Average scores 
Design  3.5 
Content/Teacher fit  3.5 
Learner Fit  2.6 
Overall  3.2 
 
Fig. 2. The average scores of http://whttp://www.eslradioandtv.com 
Figure 2 shows the average scores of www.eslradioandtv.com. In terms of design, the 
average score was 3.5, indicating that the design of the website was considered good. This 
score, however, was lower than that of www.ello.org. In terms of content, the average score 
was 3.5, indicating that the content was appropriate to use. Regarding, learner fit, the average 
score was 2.6, indicating that the website was not really appropriate for the learners. The overall 
average score was 3.2, indicating that the website was still appropriate to use. However, this 
score was lower than that of www.ello.org.  
 
3. ww.real-english.com/new-lessons.htm 
Categories  Average scores 
Design           4.2 
244 
 

|    | Categories          |    |    |   Average scores |    |
|:---|:--------------------|:---|:---|-----------------:|:---|
|    | Design              |    |    |              4   |    |
|    | Content/Teacher fit |    |    |              3.6 |    |
|    | Learner Fit         |    |    |              4   |    |
|    | Overall             |    |    |              3.9 |    |

| Categories          |   Average scores |
|:--------------------|-----------------:|
| Design              |              3.5 |
| Content/Teacher fit |              3.5 |
| Learner Fit         |              2.6 |
| Overall             |              3.2 |

|    | Categories   |    |    |   Average scores |    |
|:---|:-------------|:---|:---|-----------------:|:---|
|    | Design       |    |    |              4.2 |    |

Content/Teacher fit           4.0 
Learner Fit           4.2 
Overall           4.1 
 
Fig. 3. The average scores of www.real-english.com 
  Figure 3. shows the average scores of www.real-english.com. In terms of design, the average 
score was 4.2, indicating that the website design was excellent or highly recommended for 
student. Concerning content, the average score was 4.0, indicating the content of the website is 
good or appropriate to use. With regards to learner fit, the average score was 4.2, indicating that 
the website has excellently considered learners’ characteristics and needs. The overall average 
score was 4.1, indicating that the website was highly recommended for English learners to 
improve their listening.  
The raters’ responses to the open-comment section.   
  Based on the analysis of the open-comment section, the two raters stated the strengths 
and the weaknesses of each websites.  
According to the raters, www.ello.org included various English accents in the websites which 
was considered essential for English learning these days. This website, however, did not provide 
feedback for the learners as rater 1 stated: 
 “This website contains different English accents. However, no there was no feedback for the 
learners”.  
  In relation to www.eslradioandtv.com, the raters mentioned that the availability of different 
types of listening tasks was the main strength of the website. The website, however, only suit 
intermediate and advanced learners as rater 2 stated: 
“Many different listening tasks are available but not appropriate for beginner level” 
  Concerning www.real-English.com, the two raters stated that this website was highly 
recommended, confirming the result of the analysis of the checklist. The mentioned that various 
listening activities were provided on the website according to the leaners’ English proficiency 
levels, even though monologue listening were absent from the website, as rater B mentioned: 
“The  listening  exercises  can  be  adjusted  according  to  the  English  proficiency  level  of  the 
learners. However, monologue or speech need to be included in the website”. 
DISCUSSION  
The study found that all the three websites had their own strengths and weakness. Overall, 
the three websites were still recommended for students to learn listening skills. The design of 
the three websites partly met the criteria specified by Son (2005) in which a website should be 
well  organized,  be  appealing  to  see  and  explore,  and  own  effective  screen  displays.  The 
availability of feedback and interactivity in www.real-English.com was in accordance with the 
English learning concept proposed by Ellis and Sintani (2004), stating that interactivity and 
feedback is essential in English learning. The absence of different kinds of listening exercises 
245 
 

|    | Content/Teacher fit   |    |    |   4.0 |    |
|:---|:----------------------|:---|:---|------:|:---|
|    | Learner Fit           |    |    |   4.2 |    |
|    | Overall               |    |    |   4.1 |    |

for  all  level  of  English  learners  on  www.eslradioandtv.com  may  be  disadvantageous  for 
learners (Clements and Sarama, 2003). This means that the website needs to consider learners’ 
appropriateness before building a language website in order to accommodate all levels of 
learners.  
CONCLUSION  
  The current study evaluated three English learning websites. The three websites owned their 
strengths and weaknesses. However, based on the result of the analysis of the data, www.real-
english.com was the first top website to be recommended for learners to learn listening skills. 
The design, content, and learner fit of this website mostly fitted the criteria existing in literature. 
However, it is recommended that this website include monologue to improve the quality of the 
website. www.ello.org also met some of the requirements of good language website specified 
by the scholars. The main weakness of this website that need to be fixed was the absence of 
feedback for the learners. www.eslradioandtv also needed to improve a number of aspects of its 
websites, especially in relation to learner’s fit. 
   A number of insights regarding language learning websites can be obtained in this study. 
However, there are some weakness in this study. First, there were only three websites evaluated. 
In the future study more websites have to be evaluated. Second, this study has only sought 
perspectives from teachers regarding the websites. In the next study, leaners need to be included 
to evaluate the websites.  
REFERENCES 
Baytak, A., Tarman, B., & Ayas, C. (2011). Experiencing technology integration in education: 
children’s perceptions. International Electronic Journal of Elementary Education, 3(2), 
139-151. https://www.iejee.com/index.php/IEJEE/article/view/233.  
Bull,  S.,  &  Ma,  Y.  (2001)  Raising  learner  awareness  of  language  learning  strategies  in 
situations of limited recourses. Interactive Learning Environments, 9(2), 171-200. doi: 
10.1076/ilee.9.2.171.7439 
Clements, D. H., & Sarama, J. (2003). Strip mining for gold; research and policy in educational 
technology-a response to fool’s gold. Educational Technology Review, 11(1), 7-69. 
https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ673505 
Dragulanescu, N. (2002). “Website Quality Evaluations: Criteria and Tools”, in International 
Information & Library Review, 34, 3: 247-254. 
Ellis,  R.,  &  Shintani,  N.  (2014). Exploring  language  pedagogy  through  second  language 
acquisition research. New York: Routledge. 
Gençlter, B. (2015). How does technology affect language learning process at an early age? 
Procedia  -  Social  and  Behavioral  Sciences,  199(2015),  311  –  316.  doi: 
10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.07.552 
Gillespie, H. (2006). Unlocking learning and teaching with ICT: Identifying and overcoming 
barriers. London: David Fulton. https://trove.nla.gov.au/work/20064464 
246 
 

Gottwall, S. (2002). “Websites for Second Language Research”, in Second Language Research, 
18, 1: 83-94. 
Harmer,  J.  (2007).  The  practice  of  English  language  teaching.  England:  Pearson. 
www.worldcat.org/title/practice-ofenglish- language-teaching/oclc/149005881 
Hubbard, P. (2006). Evaluating CALL software. In L. Ducate and N. Arnold (Eds.), Calling 
on CALL: From theory and research to new directions in foreign language teaching 
(pp. 313-334). San Marcos: CALICO. 
Larsen- Freeman, D., & Anderson, M. (2011). Techniques and principles in language teaching. 
Oxford: OUP. 
Lee, S-C. (2001). Development of instructional strategy of computer application software for 
group instruction. Computers & Education, 37, 1–9 
Musthafa, B. & Hamied, F. A. (2014). Conditions for English language learning in Indonesia: 
What Indonesian teachers of English have attempted to do to enhance students’ learning 
English. In K. Sung and B. Spolsky (Eds.), Conditions for English language learning 
in Asia (pp. 63-76). Newcastle Upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholar Publishing.  
Parvin, R. H., & Salam, S. F. (2015). The effectiveness of using technology in English language 
classrooms  in  government  primary  schools  in  Bangladesh.  FIRE:  Forum  for 
International  Research  in  Education,  2(1),  47-59. 
http://preserve.lehigh.edu/fire/vol2/iss1/5 
Premaratne, D. A. (2013). An evaluation of a Chinese language learning website: BBC's real 
Chinese. Quarterly Journal of Chinese Studies, 2(2), 40-52. 
Rost, M. (2007). Commentary: I'm only trying to help: A role for interventions in teaching 
listening. Language Learning and Technology, 11(1), 102-108. 
Son, J.-B. (2005). Exploring and evaluating language learning websites. In J.-B. Son & S. 
O’Neill  (Eds.), Enhancing  learning  and  teaching:  Pedagogy,  technology  and 
language (pp. 215-227). Flaxton, Australia: Post Pressed. 
Tomlinson, B. (2009). Materials development in language teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 
247 
 