This software project is a result of a Bachelor’s thesis created at SCHUTZWERK in collaboration with
Aalen University by Philipp Schmied (@CaptnBanana).
Please refer to the corresponding blog post for more information.
Why another CAN tool?
• Built from scratch with new ideas for analysis mechanisms
• Bundles features of many other tools in one place
• Modular and extensible: Read the docs and implement your own analysis mechanisms
• Comfortable analysis using a GUI
• Manage work in separate projects using a database
• Documentation: Read the docs if you need a manual or technical info.
Installing and running:
• Run sudo ./install_requirements.sh along with sudo -E ./CANalyzat0r.sh.
This will create a folder called pipenv with a pipenv environment in it.
1

• Or just use the docker version which is recommended at this time (Check the README.md file
in the subdirectory)
For more information, read the HTML or PDF version of the documentation in the ./doc/build
folder.
Features
• Now with CAN FD Support
• Manageinterfaceconfiguration(automaticloadingofkernelmodules,managephysicalandvir‑
tual SocketCAN devices)
• Multi interface support
• Manage your work in projects. You can also import and export them in the human readable/ed‑
itable JSON format
• Logging of all actions
• Graphical sniffing
• Basic support for UDS fuzzing
• Managefindings,dumpsandknownpacketsperproject
• Easycopyandpastebetweentabs. Also,youcanjustpasteyourSocketCANfilesintoatablethat
2

allowspasting
• ThreadedSending,FuzzingandSniffing
• Add multiple analyzing threads on the GUI
• Ignore packets when sniffing ‑ Automatically filter unique packets by ID or data and ID
• Compare dumps
• Allows setting up complex setups using only one window
• Clean organization in tabs for each analysis task
• Binary packet filtering with randomization
3

• Searchforactionspecificpacketsusingbackgroundnoisefiltering
• SQLite support
• Fuzz and change the values on the fly
Working CAN Adapters
In general, all SocketCAN devices should be compatible. CANalyzat0r has been developed and suc‑
cessfully tested in combination with USB2CAN for regular CAN and PCAN‑USB Pro FD for CAN FD.
Testing It
You can use the Instrument Cluster Simulator in order to tinker with a virtual CAN bus without having
to attach real CAN devices to your machine.
Troubleshooting
Empty GUI Windows
PleasemakesurethattheQT_X11_NO_MITSHMenvironmentvariableissetto1. Whenusingsudo,
please include the -E option in order to preserve this environment variable as follows: sudo -E
./CANalyzat0r.sh.
4

Fixing the GUI style
This application has to be run as superuser. Because of a missing configuration, the displayed style
canbesettoanunwantedvaluewhentheeffectiveUIDis0. Tofixthisbehaviour,followthesesteps:
• Quick way: Execute echo "[QT]\nstyle=CleanLooks">> ~/.config/Trolltech
.conf
• Alternative way:
– Install qt4‑qtconfig: sudo apt-get install qt4-qtconfig
– Run qtconfig‑qt4 as superuser and change the GUI style to CleanLooks or GTK+
• Or use the docker container
License
This project is licensed under the GPLv3.
5