1
Pre-Hospital Management of Acute Myocardial Infarction Using
Tele-Electrocardiography System
Masoud Elhami Asl1,*, Masoomeh Rahimpour1, Mahmoud Reza Merati1,
Amir Hossein Panahi1,2, and Kamran Gholami1
1
Pooyandegan Rah Saadat Co., Tehran, Iran.
2
IRAN Telecom Research Center, Tehran, Iran.
Abstract— A comprehensive survey revealed that many patients of Acute Myocardial Infarction reach to the hospital
so late to deliver an effective treatment. This leads to poor treatment outcome which increases the mortality rates.
Multiple reasons such as lack of diagnostic facilities in the rural health care centers and absence of cardiologists in
Emergency Rooms inhibit the timely treatment. In this study, we aimed to develop an effective system to pre-hospital
management of Acute Myocardial Infarction. The effectiveness of early thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction is well
8102 yaM 51  ]PS.ssee[  1v31950.5081:viXra
established, particularly with regard to its positive effect on reducing the mortality rates. Our proposed system by
using tele-electrocardiography technology enables cardiologist to analyze the patient’s signal far away from a medical
center. This system transmits the collected ECG signal as well some vital signs to the medical center by using internet
network. In order to review and analyze the recorded data, an ECG Viewer software is added to this system. The
automatic measurement algorithm and some additional tools embedded in the ECG Viewer provide a convenient
platform for ECG signal analysis by the cardiologist in the medical center. The designed system has been tested as
a prototype in Tehran Emergency Service Center. The evaluation of the proposed system shows acceptable results
in recording, transmission, and accurate analysis of ECG signals to early diagnosis of Acute Myocardial Infarction.
I. INTRODUCTION contains an enhanced ECG viewer software which pro-
vides a proper client environment for the storage, analysis,
Acute Myocardial Infarction (MI) is a major cause of
annotating, and reviewing the 12-lead ECG signals. This
death and disability throughout the world. Approximately
software includes an automated ECG measurement algo-
15 million patients per year present to the Emergency
rithm and other additional tools that conduct to accurate
Room (ER) with chest pain or other symptoms suggestive
manual measuring. These facilities make the developed
of MI [1]. Rapid identification of MI before the golden
system a powerful tool leading to quick and efficient
hour is crucial for the initiation of effective evidence-based
diagnosis of MI. Moreover, the system can be used in
medical treatment and management [2]. MI occurs when
other applications such as rural tele-medical centers and
a narrowing in the arteries or a sudden blockage from a
tele-homecare. For populations in distant city hospitals, it
blood clot cuts off the nutrients and oxygen supply to the
is increasingly feasible to provide rural clinics with inex-
heart muscle. The Golden Hour is a critical time because
pensive medical instruments such as electrocardiographs
the heart muscles start to die within 80-90 minutes after
that transmit digital ECGs to specialized medical centers
it stops getting blood, and within six hours almost all the
and clinics to get the diagnostic information. This system
affected parts of the heart could be irreversibly damaged.
extends the reach of diagnosticians to remote areas within
On the other hand, only 1/6 of people coming to ER have
the shortest possible time [4]. The next sections present a
stroke and the others have some minor inconvenience [3].
brief description of proposed approach.
So, the much faster and more effective diagnosis of the
heart attack, the lesser would be the damage to the heart,
the more chance of recovery the stroke patient and the less
II. METHOD AND MATERIALS
time and cost of diagnosis. Electrocardiography (ECG) is
among the most useful tools for diagnostic cornerstones Tele-medicine involves the integration of information,
and complement the clinical assessment. telecommunications, human-machine and healt-hcare tech-
The aim of this study is to develop novel approach nologies. One of the aspects of tele-cardiology known as
to early diagnosis of heart attack using emerging tele- tele-electrocardiography deploys electrocardiography sys-
medicine technology. Tele-medicine is the use of elec- tems to transmit ECG signals and vital signs over internet
tronic communications and information technologies to networks. Tele-cardiology applications can be categorized
provide clinical services when participants are at different as pre-hospital, in-hospital and post-hospital. The major
locations. It eliminates distance barriers and improves purpose of 12-lead electrocardiographic diagnosis is the
the access to medical services that would often not be early detection of MI and to transmit the diagnostic
consistently available in distant rural communities. information to the receiving emergency physician before
The developed system is equipped with both ADSL the arrival of the patient to the medical center [5], [6]. In
and mobile data-network infrastructure (3G/4G) to transfer this study, we presented an integrated system to readily
the collected ECG signals and some vital signs including diagnosis of MI by distance monitoring of the patient.
HR and NIBP to the medical center. This system also The general block diagram of developed system have been

2
ADlaBCrma tItN.
Menu      Start/Stop    Rec/Stop       Alarms         Silence  
Home Care
Cardiologist 
ADlaBCrma tItN.
Menu      Start/Stop    Rec/Stop       Alarms         Silence  
Internet
Medical Center
Emergency Medical Service
ADlaBCrma tItN.
Menu      Start/Stop    Rec/Stop       Alarms         Silence  
Rural Medical Center
Data Repository/Server 
Fig. 1: GENERAL BLOCK DIAGRAM OF DEVELOPED SYSTEM.
shown in Figure 1 and, the performance of each part have C. Medical Center
been presented in the following.
After recording the data, ECG signals must be trans-
mitted to the data repository. As a part of tele-
A. ECG Signal Recording electrocardiography system, we need a software to dis-
play and analyze the recorded signal. For this purpose,
The accurate acquisition of ECG signals is an important
SAADAT ECG Viewer has been designed as an auxiliary
step to obtain the reliable diagnostic information. In the
tool to help physicians to review and analyze the ECG
introduced system, this step has been done based on the re-
signals. By using internet connection and ECG Viewer, the
quirements recommended in IEC 60601-2-25 standard [7].
cardiologist can download transmitted signals and interpret
The collected data include 12-Lead ECG signals with the
them easily. In order to facilitate the process of diagnosis,
sampling frequency of 500 Hz, with the bandwidth of 0.5-
viewer has been equipped with some additional tools such
150 Hz and 24 bit resolution. Considering the concept of
as filters and automated measurement algorithm. In the
tele-electrocardiography, we modified the sampling rate
following, the important tools used in the medical center
and the bandwidth of collected data according to IEC
have been presented.
60601-2-25 standard to add the diagnostic capability to
1) SAADAT ECG Viewer
the monitoring system. These capabilities include the
measurement of global duration, intervals and heart axis. The 12-Lead ECG signals used for tele-monitoring
applications make patient diagnostic information more
readily available for both clinician and remote consulting
B. Data Transmission
physician. With automated ECG measurements and flexi-
The ECG signals collected in the accident site, home ble on-screen reporting functions, the digital ECG enables
or clinic will be sent to the medical call center using clinicians to spend less time documenting and more time
ADSL or mobile data-network infrastructure (3G/4G) in a collaborating with the physician reviewing the results.
tag-value format based on HTTP protocol. Data integrity SAADAT ECG Viewer has been designed in order to
and connection robustness will be guaranteed by TCP/IP display and analyze the recorded signals in PC by the
protocol. This kind of communication provides a direct physicians. Connecting to the network, viewer downloads
contact with cardiologist to get an accurate diagnosis. the ECG signals from data server and displays them to the
During the data transmission, the patient demographics physicians. In addition, it provides a professional, safe and
will not be transmitted to protect the confidentiality of user friendly client environment for reviewing, analyzing
patients identity. Furthermore, to make the data traceable and interpretation of collected ECG signals. Furthermore,
the ID of electrocardiography system will be linked to the this software uses an efficient algorithm for automated
ambulance ID along with the recording time and date and measurement of fiducial points in ECG signal which
the whole data will be sent to the data repository as a helps physicians interpret ECG signals more quickly and
single batch. accurately.

3
 
Start
QRS 
R-Detection R positions Beat  QRS Bound prosperities QRS 
(Lead II) Segmentation Detection Classification
12 Lead
ECG Signal
Pre-Processing Primary
Lynn Filter  Beat
Pon / Poff
QRSon /QRSoff
Calculate  Toff QRSon
Multilead 
Durations and  T bound P Bound QRS Bound
Intervals Final  Selection Single Lead
Results  results for 
12 Leads QRSoff
P Duration
QRS Duration
PQ Interval
QT Interval
End
 
Fig. 2: GENERAL BLOCK DIAGRAM OF MEASUREMENT ALGORITHM.
Filters: In order to improve the signal quality, different calculate important parameters of ECG signals. Proposed
kind of filters have been used in the viewer including measurement algorithm is based on analyzing 10-second
high-pass and low-pass filters, notch filter, EMG filter, 12-lead ECG signals. To remove different artifacts and im-
and baseline wandering removal filter. The application of prove the quality of signal, a pre-processing step has been
notch filter on ECG signal is to eliminate 50/60 Hz power- applied to the input signal. The next step of measurement
line interference. In addition, a high-pass filter with cutoff algorithm is R wave detection which is necessary to beat
frequency of 0.8 Hz is defined to remove signal’s DC segmentation and is accomplished based on Pan-Tompkins
baseline. In order to remove motion artifact noise, a low- algorithm [9] applying on the signal of lead II; This
pass filter with cutoff frequency of 150 Hz is designed. is a well-known algorithm performing based on digital
Since muscle artifact has been a major problem in ECG analysis of the slope, amplitude and width which has been
monitoring and electrocardiography systems, a dynamic used in most of the recent successful methods for QRS
filter with variable smoothing effect in different parts of detection in automated ECG signal analysis [10] [11].
the signal is used in order to suppress the EMG noise [8]. The accurate location of R peaks on the other leads is
The wide band frequency spectrum of muscle noise and its determined based on windowing technique around the
overlap with ECG signal make it impossible to suppress it approximated peak points called PK . The general block
i
with regular filters without distortion of ECG signal. This diagram of measurement algorithm has been shown in
filter suppresses EMG noise outside the QRS region while Figure 2. According to the peak point detected as an
applying much less smoothing to the QRS complex. All approximated R wave, each beat has been segmented and
these filters make ECG signal more clear and legible for analyzed to estimate the onset and offset points of each
physicians by removing disruptive information. wave and its amplitude. Extracting main features of QRS
complex including QRS duration, R-R interval and R wave
Measurement Algorithm: Even though studies showed peak to peak amplitude is the next step which identifies the
that the accuracy of computerized ECG measurement and class to which each complex belongs. This classification
interpretation is less than cardiologists decision, using such logic has to allow for a single normally conducted beat
algorithms as an auxiliary tool has a remarkable effect and is similar to method used in Kenz electrocardiography
on improving their diagnosis. It also helps primary care system. Three classes are considered in order to beat
physicians interpret the ECG signals when cardiologists classification including ”0” type as a normal beat, ”1” type
are not accessible. Therefore, the automated measurement as a normal beat with the shorten R-R interval which has
algorithm has been added to SAADAT ECG Viewer to

4
Fig. 3: SAADAT ECG VIEWER.
TABLE I: THE RESULT OF ECGPUWAVE VS PRO-
laid before the abnormal beat, and ”2” type as an abnormal
POSED METHOD ON CSE DATABASE.
ECG beat. After beat classification, only one beat will be
selected as a primary beat to be analyzed according to
dominant method described in [12]. The next processing Mean Difference (ms) Standard Deviation
step is QRS typing. Generally, 6 different types have been
ECG- Proposed ECG- Proposed
Standard Standard
considered for QRS complex; these are including RSR’, puwave method puwave method
QR, QRS, RS, R and QS. Identifying the type of QRS P Duration ±10 7.35 0.70 15 10.27 3.70
complex is done according to the initial estimation of peak QRS
±10 7.77 1.40 10 14.51 3.52
points on each complex known as PK ; these points are Duration
i
the candidates of Q, R, S and R’ waves according to their PQ Interval ±10 2.5 -1.1 10 10.73 3.04
amplitude and upward or downward slopes. After type QT Interval ±25 -7.57 4.09 30 35.29 5.61
declaration of QRS complex, the onset and offset points
of QRS wave have been determined within the windows
locating according to the R wave location. In order to
is a reference database are being used by more than
detect P and T wave boundaries, the information of slope
110 academic and industry research centers in order to
signal has been used. Using moving window for P wave
assess and improve ECG measurement and interpretation
detection has decreased the number of falsely detected
programs. This database contains 125 records each of them
points in the case of large PR intervals. In addition, an
lasting 10 seconds with the sampling frequency of 500
adaptive thresholding in conjunction with a varied sized
Hz [14].
window for T wave detection make the algorithm more
robust. The length of this window for each wave can be Using the proposed method, the duration and intervals
changed according to the wave morphology. of ECG signals have been calculated for CSE database.
Physiologically, the global duration of P, QRS and T Deviation of these measurements from the mean referee
waves are defined by the earliest onset in one lead and estimates of CSE database are presented in Table I; the ac-
the latest offset in any other lead; indeed wave onset ceptable limits for these parameters recommended in Table
and offset do not necessarily appear at the same time in 201.105 of IEC-60601-2-25 standard [7] are mentioned in
all leads, because the activation propagate differently [7]. these tables. Figure 4, also shows the typical results of the
Considering this issue, we used a Multi-lead algorithm algorithms for different ECG signals.
to select the final value of parameters; this method has Heart axis: In clinical applications, heart axis provides
reduced the influence of possible noisy measurements. helpful information for medical diagnosis. The electrical
Interested reader referred to [13] for detailed algorithm. axis of the heart is the mean direction of action potentials
The measurement algorithm has been implemented in traveling through the ventricles during ventricular activa-
Visual Studio C++ 2010. Using CSE Multi-lead database, tion (depolarization). The QRS complex which represents
the performance of this algorithm has been evaluated. CSE ventricular depolarization is more common to determine
(Common Standard for Quantitative Electrocardiography) the frontal electrical heart axis. Any combination of 2

|            | MeanDifference(ms)   | None   | None     | StandardDeviation   | None   | None     |
|:-----------|:---------------------|:-------|:---------|:--------------------|:-------|:---------|
|            | Standard             | ECG-   | Proposed | Standard            | ECG-   | Proposed |
|            |                      | puwave | method   |                     | puwave | method   |
| PDuration  | ±10                  | 7.35   | 0.70     | 15                  | 10.27  | 3.70     |
| QRS        | ±10                  | 7.77   | 1.40     | 10                  | 14.51  | 3.52     |
| Duration   | ±10                  | 2.5    | -1.1     | 10                  | 10.73  | 3.04     |
| PQInterval | ±25                  | -7.57  | 4.09     | 30                  | 35.29  | 5.61     |
| QTInterval |                      |        |          |                     |        |          |

5
the parameters of ECG signal automatically, it provides
some tools such a ruler and zoom option for physician
2
)Vm( edutilpmA)Vm( edutilpmA)Vm( edutilpmA in order to accurate measurement of parameters manu-
1
0 ally. Sometime the existence of noise and some kind of
-1 unpredictable ECG morphologies may lead to partially
2300 2400 2500 2600 2700 2800 2900 3000 unreliable results; in this case these additional tools can
Time (sample)
help physician. A view of SAADAT ECG Viewer has been
(a)
shown in Figure 3.
2) Treatment Measures
2
Analyzing the collected ECG signal, cardiologist can
1
diagnosis the type of cardiovascular diseases (CVD) espe-
0
cially MI and call primary care physician to start treatment
-1
quickly which drastically reduce diagnosis time. Being
-2
400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800
Time (sample) able to start treatment expeditiously would be very helpful
(b) in accelerating the treatment process.
6 III. DISCUSSION
4
Rapid diagnosis of MI is undoubtedly a challenging
2
issue, and in most cases the recommended golden hour
0
-2 of 90 minutes has rarely been attained [16]. The fea-
2400 2600 2800 3000 3200 3400
Time (sample) tures of tele-electrocardiography are potentially suitable
(c) for the development of improved diagnostic systems.
Taking the advantages of this technology, we presented
Fig. 4: TYPICAL RESULTS OF PROPOSED ALGO-
a new approach to speed up the diagnostic process of
RITHMS FOR DIFFERENT ECG SIGNALS.
MI and increase the chance of recovery for ischemic
stroke patients. The designed system has been tested as
TABLE II: MEAN DIFFERENCE AND STANDARD
a prototype in Tehran Emergency Service Center. For this
DEVIATION FOR P, QRS, AND T AXIS ON CSE
implementation, a reliable platform is required to provide
DATABASE.
the basic connectivity infrastructure and a communication
protocol for safe transmission of patients data. We have
Mean Difference (in degree) Standard Deviation chosen both ADSL and mobile data network infrastruc-
P axis QRS axis T axis P axis QRS axis T axis ture (3G/4G) as the existing data connection networks.
CSE DB 2.99 0.59 1.05 21.54 15.44 19.18 To facilitate the analysis of received data rapidly and
accurately, we developed an ECG viewer software which
provides a suitable environment to automated and manual
measurement of the parameters of ECG signals. To be
limb leads can be used to calculate the QRS frontal axis. properly addressed the lake of treatment time, we equipped
Using the proposed viewer, not only the heart axis can the developed system with a mobile cell-phone module
be calculated automatically, but also they would be cal- that enables the cardiologists in medical center to make
culated manually by choosing each components baseline contact with primary care physician and therefore deliver
and peak values. Deviation of these measurements from time effective treatment in accident site before arriving to
the mean referee estimates of CSE database are presented the hospital.
in Table II.
Clinical evaluations indicates that presented system and
Computerized ECG analysis appeared to benefit primary automated ECG analysis are time efficient, reliable and
care physicians most by providing a backup opinion; this substantially cheaper in cost in comparison to conventional
second opinion was also of use to cardiologist. Additional referral systems. It enables a more widespread access to
long-term benefits that may be derived from computer rapid reperfusion thereby; therefore, reducing treatment
systems include improvement of physician interpretation delay would reduce the morbidity and mortality.
ability, reduction in interpretation time, and standardiza- Considering the effectiveness of proposed system, there
tion of electrocardiographic nomenclature and criteria. are some limitations which should be tackled appropri-
Studies shown that primary care physicians altered their ately. One of them is the internet bandwidth limitations
initial interpretations in 45 percent after being provided that causes the low speed connection and inability to quick
with computer readings of each ECG signal. In addition, transmission of data to the medical center. One of the
experts altered their initial interpretations in 39 percent solutions to overcome to this issue is using compression
tracing [15]. techniques to faster sending over low-speed internet con-
Additional tools: Even though the viewer can estimate nection. Another approach in future studies is considering

| MeanDifference(in   | degree) StandardDeviation   |
|:--------------------|:----------------------------|
| Paxis QRSaxis T     | axis Paxis QRSaxis Taxis    |
| CSEDB 2.99 0.59     | 1.05 21.54 15.44 19.18      |

6
the privacy issue such as mutual authentication and data
redirection.
The other limitation of using only electrocardiography
system is to the possibility of getting noisy ECG sig-
nals which make the diagnostic information less reliable.
Although the designed filters enhance signal components
that are important for analyzing ECG signals, using some
additional parameters which help physicians for diagnose
of MI will be helpful. Considering the remarkable varia-
tions of four blood factors including Myoglobin, Creatine
Kinase, Troponin, and H-FABP immediately after MI,
an effective solution is to design a module to accurate
measuring of them. In the future studies, we are going to
examine the effect of immediate measuring and monitoring
(a)
these diagnostic factors along with electrocardiography
records to provide prognostic information in patients with
MI.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this study, we developed a tele-electrocardiography
system to early diagnosis of MI. Clinical tests performed
to evaluate this system show acceptable results for early
diagnosis of MI. However, an evaluation strategy based
on functional, clinical and economic factors are under
(b)
consideration. In the future, tele-electrocardiography is
expected to further impact on providing better care for Fig. 5: (a) THE SCHEMATIC OF 12-LEAD ECG SIG-
the patient with cardiovascular disease. NAL RECORDING AND TRANSMISSION SYSTEM,
(b) TEST PROCESS OF DEVELOPED SYSTEM IN AN
AMBULANCE.
REFERENCES
[1] J.-P. Bassand, C. W. Hamm, D. Ardissino, E. Boersma, A. Bu-
[10] C. Lin, C. Mailhes, and J.-Y. Tourneret, “P-and t-wave delineation
daj, F. Ferna´ndez-Avile´s, K. A. Fox, D. Hasdai, E. M. Ohman,
in ecg signals using a bayesian approach and a partially collapsed
L. Wallentin et al., “Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment
gibbs sampler,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering,
of non-st-segment elevation acute coronary syndromes: The task
vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 2840–2849, 2010.
force for the diagnosis and treatment of non-st-segment elevation
[11] M. Rahimpour and B. M. Asl, “P wave detection in ecg signals
acute coronary syndromes of the european society of cardiology,”
using an extended kalman filter: an evaluation in different arrhyth-
European heart journal, vol. 28, no. 13, pp. 1598–1660, 2007.
mia contexts,” Physiological measurement, vol. 37, no. 7, p. 1089,
[2] K. Thygesen, J. S. Alpert, and H. D. White, “Universal definition
2016.
of myocardial infarction,” Journal of the American College of
[12] SUZUKEN, “Kenz cardico: Physician criteria guide,” 2009.
Cardiology, vol. 50, no. 22, pp. 2173–2195, 2007.
[13] M. Rahimpour, M. E. Asl, and M. R. Merati, “Ecg fiducial points
[3] “Apollolife - Wellness for complete health - Golden Hour for
extraction using qrs morphology and adaptive windowing for real-
Heart Attack Patients.” [Online]. Available: http://apollolife.com/
time ecg signal analysis,” in Electrical Engineering (ICEE), 2016
HealthTopics/Heart/GoldenHourforHeartAttackPatients.aspx
24th Iranian Conference on. IEEE, 2016, pp. 1925–1930.
[4] G. D. Clifford and G. B. Moody, “Signal quality in cardiorespi-
[14] J. L. Willems, “Common standards for auantitative electrocardiog-
ratory monitoring,” Physiological Measurement, vol. 33, no. 9, p.
raphy,” Journal of medical engineering & technology, vol. 9, no. 5,
null, 2012.
pp. 209–217, 1985.
[5] P. Ganguly, P. Ray, and G. Low, “Software agent based approach
[15] K. Grauer, L. Kravitz, M. Ariet, R. W. Curry, W. P. Nelson, and
towards tele-electrocardiography,”inComputer-Based MedicalSys-
H. J. Marriott, “Potential benefits of a computer ecg interpretation
tems, 2000. CBMS 2000. Proceedings. 13th IEEE Symposium on.
system for primary care physicians in a community hospital,” The
IEEE, 2000, pp. 275–280.
Journal of the American Board of Family Practice, vol. 2, no. 1,
[6] J. T. Sørensen, P. Clemmensen, and M. Sejersten, “Telecardiolog´ıa:
pp. 17–24, 1989.
pasado,presenteyfuturo,”Revistaespan˜oladecardiolog´ıa,vol.66,
[16] H. M. Krumholz, E. H. Bradley, B. K. Nallamothu, H. H. Ting,
no. 3, pp. 212–218, 2013.
W. B. Batchelor, E. Kline-Rogers, A. F. Stern, J. R. Byrd, and
[7] “International standard, IEC. 60601-2-51: Particular requirements
J. E. Brush, “A campaign to improve the timeliness of primary
for safety, including essential performance of recording and
percutaneous coronary intervention: Door-to-balloon: An alliance
analysing single channel and multichannel electrocardiographs,”
for quality,” JACC: Cardiovascular Interventions, vol. 1, no. 1, pp.
Edition 2.0, 2011.
97–104, 2008.
[8] A. Hashemi, M. Rahimpour, and M. R. Merati, “Dynamic gaussian
filter for muscle noise reduction in ecg signal,” in Electrical
Engineering (ICEE), 2015 23rd Iranian Conference on. IEEE,
2015, pp. 120–124.
[9] J. Pan and W. J. Tompkins, “A real-time qrs detection algorithm,”
IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering, no. 3, pp. 230–236,
1985.