Extended data 6 
ACORN II study analysis plan 
 
 
STATISTICAL 
ANALYSIS PLAN 
 
Study Title: 
A  Clinically-Oriented  Antimicrobial 
Resistance  Surveillance  Network  – 
Phase 2 
 
Short title: 
Infection surveillance to improve 
understanding of antibiotic resistance 
Version: 2.4 
Date: 01 Sep 2022 
Protocol number: BAC21002 
 
 
Study Statistician: Sue J Lee 
Email: sue@tropmedres.ac 
Infe ction surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  1 

Name and Function  Date  Signature 
 
DD/MM/YYYY 
SAP Author     
     
Sue J Lee 
Chief Investigator(s) 
     
Paul Turner 
     
 
Elizabeth Ashley 
     
 
Rogier van Doorn 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT: 
This document contains confidential information that must not be disclosed to anyone 
other than the authorised individuals from the University of Oxford, the Investigator 
Team, and members of the Oxford Tropical Research Ethics Committee (OxTREC) 
and relevant Local / National Ethics Committees, unless authorised to do so. 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  2 

| Name and Function     | Date       | Signature   |
|:----------------------|:-----------|:------------|
|                       |            |             |
|                       | DD/MM/YYYY |             |
|                       |            |             |
| SAP Author            |            |             |
|                       |            |             |
| Sue J Lee             |            |             |
| Chief Investigator(s) |            |             |
|                       |            |             |
| Paul Turner           |            |             |
| Elizabeth Ashley      |            |             |
| Rogier van Doorn      |            |             |

Table of contents 
1  Introduction ......................................................................................................... 4 
1.1  Description of the study ............................................................................... 4 
1.2  Study aim ..................................................................................................... 4 
1.3  Timing of the analysis .................................................................................. 5 
2  Statistical hypotheses and methods .................................................................... 5 
2.1  Primary outcome(s) ...................................................................................... 5 
2.2  Secondary outcomes ................................................................................... 5 
3  Study population and analysis datasets .............................................................. 6 
3.1  Criteria for eligibility, recruitment, withdrawal and follow-up ......................... 6 
3.2  Analysis datasets ......................................................................................... 7 
4  Description of statistical methods ........................................................................ 7 
4.1  General approach ........................................................................................ 7 
4.2  Baseline descriptive statistics .................................................................... 10 
4.3  Analysis of the primary outcome(s) ............................................................ 11 
4.4  Analysis of the secondary outcome(s) ....................................................... 11 
5  Additional sub-group analyses .......................................................................... 13 
6  Sample size....................................................................................................... 13 
7  Case definitions................................................................................................. 13 
8  Statistical software ............................................................................................ 15 
9  Document history .............................................................................................. 15 
10  References ........................................................................................................ 16 
 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  3 

1  Introduction 
This  document  describes  the  statistical  analysis  plan  for  the  following  project:  “A 
Clinically-Oriented Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Network – Phase 2”. 
 
1.1  Description of the study 
Current antimicrobial resistance (AMR) surveillance systems are typically passive and 
pathogen-focused, based on routine antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) results 
alone, generated by clinical microbiology laboratories. These systems lack relevant 
patient-level metadata and clinical syndromic denominators to appropriately inform 
treatment  guidelines and  decision making  (1),  and,  especially  in low-  and middle- 
income  countries  (LMIC),  suffer  from  various  biases,  due  to  lack  of  diagnostic 
stewardship and underutilisation of diagnostic microbiology resources (2). Collection 
of samples for microbiologic testing is often not part of a standard diagnostic work-up 
for many clinical syndromes, it is more likely for samples to be collected only in more 
severe cases or in case of treatment failure. 
 
The  utility  of  integrated  patient  and  laboratory-based  surveillance,  i.e.  case-based 
surveillance, has been highlighted recently (3, 4). In addition, there are several key 
patient-level questions that may not be adequately answered by passive pathogen- 
focussed AMR surveillance: 
•  What is the impact and cost of a drug-resistant infection (DRI) at the patient 
level? 
•  What are the patient-level risk factors for DRI in a particular setting? 
•  Which AMR-syndrome combinations are associated with the poorest outcomes 
in particular patient groups? 
High-quality patient-level surveillance data from LMICs are necessary to inform models 
to determine the impact of AMR, using big datasets with key patient-level variables, 
and  to  identify  opportunities  for  intervention  (5).  The  concept  of  ACORN  is 
operationally  efficient  case-based  AMR  surveillance  that  can  be  deployed  in  low 
resource settings to add value to existing laboratory capacity building efforts. 
 
The current ACORN protocol (https://acornamr.net/#/) incorporates lessons learned 
during the pilot phase, including expansion of patients of interest and refinements in 
case capture procedures. Additionally, data will be collected to enable calculation of 
attributable mortality for BSI caused by resistant Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus 
aureus in accordance with the WHO-GLASS attributable mortality protocol (6). 
 
 
1.2  Study aim 
The aim of this project is to roll out clinical AMR surveillance as part of routine care in 
a network of hospitals in across Asia and Africa, and to collect microbiology and clinical 
data from 2,500 patients per site, that will expand on the sample-based approach of 
WHO GLASS and enable classification of infection syndromes, origin of infection and 
outcome. 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  4 

1.3  Timing of the analysis 
Prospective surveillance in at least 15 study sites in nine countries will continue for 24 
months from time of site commencement. As the primary objective is to implement 
AMR surveillance with comprehensive data capture, summary level analysis will be 
available in real time throughout the study via a Shiny dashboard application, specific 
to  each  site.  Via  the  dashboard,  site  investigators  will  have  access  to  real  time 
enrolment frequencies and patient demographics, follow up on clinical outcome and 
day  28  status,  weekly  active  hospital-acquired  infections  (HAI)  point  prevalences, 
microbiology summaries, and antimicrobial susceptibility and resistance patterns. 
 
Secondary  outcomes  characterising  drug-resistant  infections  and  calculating 
attributable  mortality  for  extended  spectrum  beta-lactamase  producing  E.  coli  and 
methicillin  resistant  S.  aureus  bloodstream  infection  will  be  analysed  at  study 
completion in Sep2024. This document concentrates on the analysis of the secondary 
outcomes of ACORN. 
 
 
2  Statistical hypotheses and methods 
2.1  Primary outcome(s) 
The primary outcome of the study is to implement clinical antimicrobial resistance 
(AMR) surveillance of hospitalised patients with suspected acute bacterial infections 
at  up  to  15  sites  in  nine  countries.  A  comparison  of  the  results  from  ACORN 
surveillance, with and without clinical denominators, against GLASS estimates will be 
compiled. 
 
2.2  Secondary outcomes 
The secondary outcomes include: 
2.1.  The characterisation of drug-resistant infections (DRI) by clinical syndrome, 
place  of  acquisition  (CAI,  HAI,  HCAI),  patient  group  (adult,  paediatric, 
neonatal),  sample  type,  and  location  (site,  country,  region).  Target 
organisms will be the bloodstream infections (BSI) relevant WHO GLASS 
pathogens:  Streptococcus  pneumoniae,  Staphylococcus  aureus, 
Salmonella  spp.,  Pseudomonas  aeruginosa,  Neisseria  meningitidis, 
Klebsiella  pneumoniae,  Haemophilus  influenzae,  Escherichia  coli,  and 
Acinetobacter spp. Pathogens will be described separately as well as in 
groups to facilitate analysis of small numbers: Enterobacterales (E. coli 
and K. pneumoniae), non-fermenting Gram negatives (Acinetobacter spp 
and P. aeruginosa) and vaccine preventable pathogens (S. pneumoniae, 
N. meningitidis, and H. influenzae). 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  5 

2.2.  The determination of attributable mortality for extended spectrum beta- 
lactamase  producing  E.  coli  and  methicillin  resistant  S.  aureus 
bloodstream infection 
2.3.  Determination of the major indications for prescribing parenteral antibiotics 
by patient group (adult, paediatric, neonatal), timing of prescription (day of 
admission versus >2 days after admission), and location (site, country, 
region) 
2.4.  Frequency  of  major  empiric  parenteral  antibiotics  used  by  clinical 
syndrome,  place  of  acquisition  (CAI,  HAI,  HCAI),  patient  group  (adult, 
paediatric, neonatal), and location (site, country, region) 
2.5.  Length  of  stay  (LoS)  in  hospital  (days)  estimated  for  resistant  versus 
susceptible infections, pooled as well as by pathogen groups. 
2.6.  Mortality at discharge and at day 28, pooled as well as by pathogen groups, 
by country, place of acquisition (CAI, HAI, HCAI), resistance status, and 
by clinical syndrome. 
 
3  Study population and analysis datasets 
3.1  Criteria for eligibility, recruitment, withdrawal and follow-up 
The  surveillance  population  includes  all  hospitalised  patients  of  any  age  with 
suspected infection enrolled in ACORN. 
 
Inclusion  for  CAI:  Patient  with  clinically  suspected  infection  on  admission  to  a 
surveillance ward (including those transferred directly from another facility), in whom 
the decision to start IV antibiotic treatment has been made, and willing to participate 
in the surveillance. 
 
Inclusion for HAI: Patient resident on a surveillance ward during a scheduled point 
prevalence survey for HAI, willing to participate in the surveillance, and meeting the 
following  criteria  (adapted  from  the  European  Centre  for  Disease  Prevention  and 
Control definition (7)): 
•  Clinical suspicion of bacterial infection and prescription / commencement of 
a new IV antibiotic (but not escalation of antibiotic treatment for an existing 
suspected or proven infection) 
AND 
•  Onset of infection syndrome at least Day 3 of admission (Day 1 = day of 
admission) 
AND 
•  Infection syndrome was not active during the previous weekly review: i.e. 
onset  at  least  one  day  following  the  most  recent  previous  HAI  point 
prevalence survey 
 
There are no criteria for stopping or discontinuing, as this is not an interventional study. 
Withdrawal from surveillance will not result in exclusion of the data already collected 
for that participant from analysis, unless the participant does not permit this use. 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  6 

The final follow-up of patients will be on day 28 (or next working day if day 28 falls on 
a weekend or public holiday) post enrolment to determine post-discharge health status 
(alive [fully recovered], alive [not fully back to normal activities], or dead) and date of 
death, if appropriate. If enrolled for >1 infection episode during an admission, then this 
assessment will occur 28 days following the final enrolment date. 
 
3.2  Analysis datasets 
Analysis will include all patients enrolled into surveillance with data. Minimum data for 
inclusion  in  the  analysis  of  attributable  mortality  will  be  confirmation  and  date  of 
bloodstream infection, admission date, resistance status, and outcome. 
 
 
4  Description of statistical methods 
4.1  General approach 
4.1.1  Implementation 
 
Site  summary  and  surveillance  staff  assessment  questionnaire  data  will  be 
summarised in tables and graphs. Simple descriptive statistics will be used where 
appropriate to compare data within and across sites, countries, and regions. A logical 
framework  defining  goals,  purpose  and  indicators  will  be  set  out  in  a  separate 
document. 
 
4.1.2  AMR surveillance data 
 
Site-level data visualisation and analysis will be done onsite using the project specific 
R-Shiny app or online via the identical web app (https://acornamr.net). For the overall 
project, site surveillance datasets will be merged prior to analysis. 
 
 
For  all  cases,  clinical  notes  and  electronic  hospital  information  systems  will  be 
reviewed regularly to capture: 
 
•  Final categorisation of infection syndrome (or infection diagnosis rejected) 
•  Hospitalisation outcome (death, discharge, discharged moribund) 
•  Disposition (home, transfer to another healthcare facility, unknown) 
•  Number of days admitted to an intensive care unit 
Key outcome variables will be: 
Blood culture and other microbiology results (Dummy Table 1) 
 
•  Presence or absence of target pathogen 
•  Frequency of blood culture testing 
•  Antimicrobial susceptibilities 
•  Duration of hospitalisation 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  7 

•  Hospital discharge vital status 
•  Day-28 vital status 
 
Data will be summarised in tables and graphs (Appendix). Categorical variables will 
be compared using Chi-squared or Fisher’s exact test. Continuous variables will be 
compared using Student’s t-test, one-way ANOVA, or their non-parametric equivalents. 
Alternatively  or  in  addition  to  comparisons,  associations  may  be  quantified  using 
univariate regression. While no formal correction for multiple comparisons will be made, 
p-values will be reported to the third decimal so results can be assessed against a 
Bonferroni corrected p-value (i.e., significance level of alpha/m, where alpha = 0.05 and 
m = number of comparisons), if desired. Results will be stratified by: 
 
•  Clinical infection syndrome 
•  Participant age category (neonatal (<28 days), paediatric (1 month – 17 years), 
adult (≥18 years)) 
•  Place of acquisition (CAI, HCAI, HAI) 
•  Location (site, country, region) 
 
Patients who have a single admission with a single infection will be compared against 
those with multiple admissions or admissions with multiple infections, in particular with 
respect to underlying illness and comorbidities. Subsequent analysis may be modified 
depending on any key differences found, e.g., if neonates and elderly patients are 
found to be significantly more likely to have multiple infections when compared with all 
others, analysis may be stratified by age group. 
 
 
 
4.1.2.1  Associations with resistance and mortality 
 
Univariable  and  multivariable  (see  more  on  this  below  in  section  on  Attributable 
Mortality) logistic regression models will be fitted to explore whether any clinical or 
microbiological variables are associated with the outcomes of resistance, mortality and 
discharged moribund. The unit of analysis will be admissions, with patient and site 
fitted as random effects. 
 
4.1.2.2  Length of stay 
 
Length  of  stay  (LoS)  will  be  summarised  as  median  with  inter-quartile  range,  by 
resistant versus susceptible infections, as well as by died versus survived to discharge. 
Overall LoS will be calculated from time of admission to hospital. Length of stay will also 
be assessed from time of blood culture. 
 
4.1.2.3  Antimicrobial susceptibility testing 
 
For  specimen-  and  isolate-based  analyses,  data  will  be  deduplicated  prior  to 
calculation  of  infection  and  antimicrobial  resistance  rates,  following  WHO  GLASS 
recommendations. For overall AST reporting, the first isolate of a given species per 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  8 

participant  per  specimen  type  and  place  of  acquisition  (CAI,  HCAI,  HAI)  will  be 
analysed. Summaries will include: 
 
•  Incidence of target pathogen bloodstream infection, including drug resistant 
infections (denominator will be only those with a blood culture sample) 
 
•  The  percentage  of  isolates  resistant  or  susceptible  to  key  antibiotics  or 
treatment regimens 
 
4.1.2.4  Attributable mortality 
 
For  E.  coli  and  S.  aureus  BSI  attributable  mortality  analyses,  the  survival  model 
approach outlined in the WHO-GLASS protocol will be followed (6). Given the likely 
small numbers of BSI at each site, data from across the network will be combined. At 
each site, observed crude case fatality rates (survival data) will be compared between 
cohorts:  patients  with  AMR  BSI  for  selected  pathogen-antimicrobial  combination 
(cohort 1), patient with non-AMR BSI for selected pathogen-antimicrobial combination 
(cohort 2), or ACORN-enrolled patient from the same surveillance ward in whom E. 
coli and S. aureus were not isolated from blood cultures and who did not receive pre- 
culture antibiotics (cohort 3). 
 
Cases  of  AMR  E.  coli  or  S.  aureus  bacteraemia  (cohort  1)  will  be  matched  1:1 
retrospectively with cases of non-AMR E. coli or S. aureus bacteraemia (cohort 2). 
Optionally,  randomly  selected  exposure density  sampling plus  additional  matching 
criteria  (age  group  and  reason  for  admission)  will  be  used  to  match  1:1  cohort  3 
patients with cohort 1 and cohort 2 patients.  Ideally, matching will be by age category, 
admission ward, month of infection, and clinical syndrome at enrolment, as well as by 
the time from admission to infection, i.e., uninfected patients admission should be at 
least as long as matched case time to infection. This will result in three groups of 
patients (infected – drug susceptible, infected – drug resistant, non-infected) to enable 
robust determination of attributable mortality under both “additive” and “replacement” 
scenarios. 
 
The effect of antibiotic resistance on vital status will be estimated using cause-specific 
Cox proportional hazards models, assessing the competing events of mortality and 
discharge alive, from the time of infection. Admissions, rather than patients, will be 
used  as  the  unit  of  analysis  and  only  the  first  relevant  infection  episode  will  be 
considered. Multivariable models will include gender, ICU stay (y/n), surgery (y/n), 
Charlson comorbidity index score, age, type of admission and Pitt bacteraemia score 
as categorical (scores of 0-1, 2-3 and ≥4) or qSOFA score. A composite all-cause end- 
of-stay endpoint (either death or discharge alive) will also be assessed which may be 
interpreted as an indication of the daily hazard of a patient’s admission ending. All 
models will include adjustment for the time (days) between admission and infection. 
Proportional hazards assumptions will be checked using Schoenfeld residuals and 
visual inspection of log-log plots. Non-proportional hazards will be corrected using 
stratification. Separate models for CAI and HAI will be run, if numbers permit. 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  9 

4.1.2.5  Empiric treatment 
 
For empiric antibiotic analyses, drugs prescribed on the day of admission (CAI, HCAI) 
or symptom onset (HAI) will be classified according to the WHO AWaRe criteria (8). 
Concordance  (i.e.  cultured  isolate  was  susceptible)  or  discordance  (i.e.  cultured 
isolate was resistant) with microbiology test results will be determined (Dummy Table 
3). 
 
To assess the impact of initial treatment on mortality another set of Cox proportional 
hazards models will be run, but for antibiotic resistance will be replaced by receipt of 
active initial therapy as the exposure of interest. 
 
4.1.2.6  Excess length of stay 
 
Excess length of stay in days will be calculated using multistate models. The difference 
in expected length of stay will be estimated between the resistant and  susceptible 
states. 
 
4.1.2.7  Missing values 
 
In the case where key variables of interest have 20% or more missing values, missing 
values imputation will be considered, and results presented alongside the “complete 
case” analysis. 
 
4.2  Baseline descriptive statistics 
On the day of enrolment, baseline clinical data will be extracted from the patient clinical 
records / electronic hospital information systems and by brief interview of the patient: 
•  Date of birth or age 
•  Gender 
•  Date of admission and original hospitalisation (if transferred directly from 
another healthcare facility or ward) 
•  Admission type (emergency or elective) 
•  Primary reason for admission 
•  Co-morbidity status (modified Charlson comorbidity index) – for adults 
•  Healthcare exposure, hospitalisation, and surgery in the three months 
before admission 
 
 
The following data will be collected about the infection episode: 
•  Surveillance category (CAI or HAI) 
•  Ward details 
•  Clinically suspected infection syndrome / reason for prescription 
•  Clinical severity signs on date of admission (CAI) or symptom onset (HAI) 
o  qSOFA score for adults, ≥18 years (9) 
o  Sepsis six recognition features or LqSOFA for children, <18 years 
(10) 
o  General WHO severity signs for neonates, <28 days (6) 
•  Presence of medical devices / surgical procedures (HAI only) 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  10 

•  Microbiology 
o  Blood  culture  collected  within  24  hours  of  admission  (CAI)  or 
symptom onset (HAI) 
o  Received ≥1 dose of a systemic antibiotic in the 24 hours before 
the blood culture collected 
•  Empiric antibiotic treatment details (all antibiotics prescribed on the day of 
admission (CAI) or symptom onset (HAI)) 
 
During hospitalisation, cases with confirmed E. coli or S. aureus BSI will have 
additional data collected for analysis: 
•  Admission ward details 
•  Immunosuppression status in the 48 hours prior to the blood culture 
•  Pitt BSI score on date of blood culture collection 
•  Empiric and targeted antibiotic treatment details, plus date of delivery of 
AST results to treating clinicians 
•  Likely source of infection 
•  Features of complicated infection (S. aureus only) 
 
 
4.3  Analysis of the primary outcome(s) 
Specific outcomes from the surveillance include: 
4.3.1  Number of sites with successful implementation of surveillance defined 
as activity on at least three wards with upload of an .acorn data file at 
monthly intervals over at least 12 months 
4.3.2  Numbers of patients enrolled by clinical syndrome, place of acquisition 
(community-acquired  infection  [CAI],  hospital-acquired  infection  [HAI], 
healthcare associated infection [HCAI]), patient group (adult, paediatric, 
neonatal), and location (site, country, region) 
4.3.3  Proportion  of  timely  (within  48  hours)  and  correctly  (i.e.  syndrome- 
relevant specimens collected: blood culture (all patients), CSF specimen 
(CNS infection patients), lower respiratory tract specimens (pneumonia 
patients),  urine  specimen  (urinary  tract  infection  patients))  sampled 
patients per clinical syndrome, place of acquisition, and patient group by 
site, country, and region 
4.3.4  Clinician  and  surveillance  staff  acceptability  and  ease  of  use  survey 
results by site, country, and region 
4.3.5  Comparison of the results, with and without clinical denominators, against 
GLASS estimates (including an assessment of how well aligned locally 
cultured organisms are with the GLASS pathogen list) 
 
4.4  Analysis of the secondary outcome(s) 
Drug-resistant infections (DRI) will be characterised by clinical syndrome, place of 
acquisition (CAI, HAI, HCAI), patient group (adult, paediatric, neonatal), and location 
(site, country, region) using estimates of: 
4.4.1  Frequencies  of  resistant  and  susceptible  infections  for  WHO  GLASS 
target pathogens with isolate, specimen, and case level denominators by 
location. 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  11 

4.4.2  Incidence  of  WHO  GLASS  target  pathogen  bloodstream  infection  for 
patients  with  blood  culture  specimen  (per  1,000  patient  episodes)  by 
clinical syndrome, place of acquisition, patient group, and location 
4.4.3  Weekly HAI point prevalence data by clinical syndrome, patient group, 
and location (with denominator being the number of patients resident on 
the ward at 8am on day of survey) 
4.4.4  Duration of hospitalisation  for  DRI  and non-DRI  by  clinical  syndrome, 
place of acquisition, patient group, and location 
4.4.5  Patient outcomes / mortality for DRI and non-DRI by clinical syndrome, 
place of acquisition, patient group, and location 
4.4.6  Economic  costs  for  DRI  and  non-DRI  by  clinical  syndrome,  place  of 
acquisition, patient group, and location (Statistical analysis procedures 
reported in separate document) 
 
Other secondary outcomes include: 
4.4.7  Determination  of  attributable  mortality  for  extended  spectrum  beta- 
lactamase  producing  E.  coli  and  methicillin  resistant  S.  aureus 
bloodstream  infection  using  cause  specific  Cox  models  for  death, 
discharge alive and a composite “all-cause” outcome. 
4.4.8  Incidence of bloodstream infection by E. coli and S. aureus (per 1,000 
patient episodes) by clinical syndrome, place of acquisition, patient group, 
CAI, HAI, and location for patients who have a blood culture collected 
4.4.9  Frequencies  of  antimicrobial  susceptibility  (single  and  multi-drug 
resistance) of E. coli and S. aureus bloodstream infections by clinical 
syndrome, place of acquisition, patient group, and location 
4.4.10 Patient outcomes / mortality for susceptible vs. resistant E. coli and S. 
aureus bloodstream infections by clinical syndrome, place of acquisition, 
patient group, and location. The impact of AMR on mortality and hospital 
length of stay will be assessed for ESBL-producing Enterobacteriaceae 
and MRSA. Patients infected with these two drug-resistant pathogens will 
be  compared  against  patients  infected  with  the  same  organisms  but 
without the presence of ESBL or methicillin-resistance, respectively. 
4.4.11 The effect of AMR on the probability of mortality will be estimated using 
a  Cox  Proportional  Hazards  model,  with  time  from  infection  as  the 
timescale. To account for competing outcomes, we will build two models 
(one  for  in-hospital  mortality  and  one  for  discharge  alive)  and  report 
cause-specific hazard ratios. 
4.4.12 Major indications for prescribing parenteral antibiotics by patient group 
(adult,  paediatric,  neonatal),  timing  of  prescription  (day  of  admission 
versus >2 days after admission), and location (site, country, region) 
4.4.13 Frequencies of the major empiric antibiotics used by clinical syndrome, 
place of acquisition (CAI, HAI, HCAI), patient group (adult, paediatric, 
neonatal), and location (site, country, region) 
4.4.14 Excess length of stay will be calculated using multistate models with four 
states  (admission,  resistant,  susceptible  and  discharged/died).  The 
expected length of stay will be estimated for each day in the resistant and 
susceptible  states  using  Aalen-Johansen  estimators  for  transition 
probabilities.  Difference  in  the  length  of  stay  will  then  be  calculated 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  12 

between resistant infections and sensitive infections, and then a weighted 
average estimated using the observed distribution of time to infection. 
Standard  errors  and  95%  confidence  intervals  will  be  derived  by 
bootstrapping. 
 
 
5  Additional sub-group analyses 
 
Subgroups to be considered include, but are not necessarily limited to: 
 
•  Place of acquisition 
o  CAI (a subset of this group will be direct transfer patients) 
o  HAI 
o  HCAI 
 
•  Participant age category 
o  Adult 
o  Paediatric 
o  Neonatal 
 
•  Location 
o  Site 
o  Country 
o  Region 
 
•  Clinical infection syndrome 
 
 
 
6  Sample size 
 
Based  on  pilot  data,  and  the  revised  enrolment  criteria,  the  target  number  of 
enrolments per site will be 2,500 (estimated 37,500 infection episodes in total) over 
the 24-month surveillance period. 
 
Assuming that 80% of enrolled patient episodes include a blood culture (pilot: 88% for 
Cambodia and 75% for Laos) and that 5% of blood cultures will yield a target organism 
(pilot: 4.9% for Cambodia and 7.4% for Laos), then the surveillance will yield 37,500 
patient  episodes,  30,000  blood  culture  results,  and  1,500  target  pathogen  blood 
culture isolates with AST data. Non-blood culture specimen data, especially urine and 
pus / swabs, will be expected to increase the organism yield significantly (11). 
 
 
7  Case definitions 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  13 

For  the  purposes  of  this  study,  patients  will  be  defined as  having  susceptible  or 
resistant infections to received treatment and/or 1st and 2nd line empiric guideline 
regimens  (ampicillin  plus  gentamicin,  cefotaxime  /  ceftriaxone  (3rd  generation 
cephalosporins),  or  a  carbapenem).  For  attributable  mortality  work,  definitions  are 
resistance to 3rd generation cephalosporins (cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, or ceftazidime) 
for E. coli and resistance to methicillin for S. aureus. For all pathogens, resistance will 
be described following the core WHO GLASS organism – antibacterial agent pairs 
(excluding tigecycline, colistin and 4th generation cephalosporins) (12): 
 
 
 
This  list  of  pathogens  and  pathogen-antimicrobial  combinations  of  interest  will  be 
updated according to the anticipated revised GLASS manual when released or, if 
publication  is  delayed,  according  to  current  insights  into  relevant  pathogens  and 
pathogen-antimicrobial combinations. 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  14 

Healthcare associated infections (HCAI) will be defined as the subset of CAI, where 
the patient was known to have had exposure to healthcare facilities in the three months 
prior to admission. 
 
For syndrome-based analyses, the clinical syndrome will be that which was recorded 
at enrolment. Discharge syndrome will be used to identify which patients should not 
be included in the analysis due to non-infection diagnosis. 
 
8  Statistical software 
 
The analysis will be performed using STATA, v17.0. 
 
9  Document history 
 
 
Version  Notes / Changes 
1.0 
Initial version 
1.1 
Updated after comments received from Paul Turner 
1.2 
Add length of stay as secondary endpoint (SJL) 
1.3  Add detail for multiple comparisons, missing values and clarifications related to 
infection v. admission v. patient units (SJL) 
1.4 
Respond to queries/suggestions made by Rogier and Liz (SJL and PT) 
2.0 
Resolve queries and agree discussion points (RvD, EA, PT, JH, SJL) 
2.1 
Minor revisions for “final” review (SJL) 
2.2  Tidy up of document after discussion/approval of attributable mortality methods 
with Barbara Tornimbene (WHO) 
2.3  Incorporated/addressed final comments/concerns from Barbara Tornimbene 
(WHO) and chief investigators. 
2.4 
Added references (SJL), 1 Sep 2022 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  15 

| Version   | Notes / Changes                                                                   |
|:----------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 1.0       | Initial version                                                                   |
| 1.1       | Updated after comments received from Paul Turner                                  |
| 1.2       | Add length of stay as secondary endpoint (SJL)                                    |
| 1.3       | Add detail for multiple comparisons, missing values and clarifications related to |
|           | infection v. admission v. patient units (SJL)                                     |
| 1.4       | Respond to queries/suggestions made by Rogier and Liz (SJL and PT)                |
| 2.0       | Resolve queries and agree discussion points (RvD, EA, PT, JH, SJL)                |
| 2.1       | Minor revisions for “final” review (SJL)                                          |
| 2.2       | Tidy up of document after discussion/approval of attributable mortality methods   |
|           | with Barbara Tornimbene (WHO)                                                     |
| 2.3       | Incorporated/addressed final comments/concerns from Barbara Tornimbene            |
|           | (WHO) and chief investigators.                                                    |
| 2.4       | Added references (SJL), 1 Sep 2022                                                |

10 References 
 
1.  Ashley  EA,  Recht  J,  Chua  A,  Dance  D,  Dhorda  M,  Thomas  NV,  et  al.  An 
inventory  of  supranational  antimicrobial  resistance  surveillance  networks  involving 
low-  and  middle-income  countries  since  2000.  J  Antimicrob  Chemother. 
2018;73(7):1737-49. 
2.  Rempel OR, Laupland KB. Surveillance for antimicrobial resistant organisms: 
potential sources and magnitude of bias. Epidemiol Infect. 2009;137(12):1665-73. 
3.  Seale  AC,  Hutchison  C,  Fernandes  S,  Stoesser  N,  Kelly  H,  Lowe  B,  et  al. 
Supporting  surveillance  capacity  for  antimicrobial  resistance:  Laboratory  capacity 
strengthening  for  drug  resistant  infections  in  low  and  middle  income  countries. 
Wellcome Open Res. 2017;2(91). 
4.  Ryu S, Cowling BJ, Wu P, Olesen S, Fraser C, Sun DS, et al. Case-based 
surveillance  of  antimicrobial  resistance  with  full  susceptibility  profiles.  JAC- 
Antimicrobial Resistance. 2019;1(3). 
5.  Hay  SI,  Rao  PC,  Dolecek  C,  Day  NPJ,  Stergachis  A,  Lopez  AD,  et  al. 
Measuring and mapping the global burden of antimicrobial resistance. BMC medicine. 
2018;16(1):78. 
6.  Global Antimicrobial Resistance and Use Surveillance System. GLASS method 
for estimating attributable mortality of antimicrobial resistant bloodstream infections 
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020. 
7.  European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Point prevalence survey 
of  healthcare  associated  infections  and  antimicrobial  use  in  European  acute  care 
hospitals – protocol version 5.3. Stockholm: ECDC; 2016. 
8.  World Health Organization. Adopt AWaRe: Handle antibiotics with care 2019 
[Available from: https://adoptaware.org/.] 
9.  Rudd KE, Seymour CW, Aluisio AR, Augustin ME, Bagenda DS, Beane A, et 
al. Association of the Quick Sequential (Sepsis-Related) Organ Failure Assessment 
(qSOFA) Score With Excess Hospital Mortality in Adults With Suspected Infection in 
Low- and Middle-Income Countries. JAMA. 2018;319(21):2202-11. 
10.  Tong  J,  Plunkett  A,  Daniels  R.  G218(P)  The  Paediatric  Sepsis  6  Initiative. 
Archives of Disease in Childhood. 2014;99:A93. 
11.  Vihta K-D, Gordon NC, Stoesser N, Quan TP, Tyrrell CSB, Vongsouvath M, et 
al. Antimicrobial resistance surveillance: can we estimate resistance in bloodstream 
infections from other types of specimen? medRxiv. 2020.10.12.20211243. 
12.  World  Health  Organization.  Global  Antimicrobial  Resistance  Surveillance 
System: Manual for Early Implementation. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015. 
  Infection surveillance to improve understanding of antibiotic resistance SAP 
Protocol BAC21002  Version 2.4 Date 01 Sep 2022  16 