 
 
Print ISSN: 2958-3675 || Online ISSN: 2958-3683 
International Journal of Medical and Pharmaceutical Research 
Journal Home Page: www.ijmpr.in 
Vol-1 Iss-1, JUL-DEC 2020 
Effects Of Substituting Maize For Yellow Cocoyam (Xanthosoma Sagittifolium) As  Enery Source For 
Weaner Pigs 
 
R. P. Obongekpe* 
Department of Animal Science, University of Uyo, Uyo, Nigeria* 
A B S T R A C T 
The  research  was  conducted  to  investigate  the  dietary  effect  of  substituting  maize  for  cocoyam  (Xanthosoma 
Sagittifolium) as energy source for weaner pigs. The experiment was conducted at the Swine unit of the Teaching and 
Research Farm, University of Uyo, Uyo, Akwa Ibom State. The cocoyam was collected and processed by sundring to 
form a cocoyam corm meal (CCM).A total of 16 weaner pigs of large white were used for the study. The pigs were 
divided into 4 groups based on average initial weights (20-25kg) and each group of weaner pigs were respectively 
allocated  to  each  of  the  four  treatment  diets  using  a  completely  randomized  design  (CRD).  Each  treatment  group 
contained 2 replicates of 4pigs, 2male and 2female). These pigs were fed twice daily and water supplied ad-libitium. Four 
diets were formulated to contain 0%, 20%, 40% and 60% of CCM. Data  were collected on growth performance and 
blood profile. Result revealed that there was significant (P>0.05) differences on all the growth performance parameters 
measured.  No  significant  differences  (P>0.05)  were  observed  on  all  blood  profile  parameters  measured  except  the 
albumin and creatinine. The albumin and creatinine values ranged from 2.63-3.52 g/dl and 0.90- 1.50mg/dl respectively. 
It can be concluded that weaner pigs fed 20% CCM based diet yielded best results in terms of performance and there was 
no detrimental effect on their blood profile. Implications and recommendations were made from the findings of the study. 
 
Keywords:  Cocoyam, Growth performance, Weaner pigs. 
 
*Corresponding Author 
R. P. Obongekpe 
Department of Animal Science, University of Uyo, 
Uyo, Nigeria 
 
   © Copy Right, IJMPR, 2020. All Rights Reserved   
 
INTRODUCTION 
Consistent increase in cost of conventional swine feedstuffs in Nigeria has led to search and utilization of alternative 
feed  sources  for  swines  [1];  [2].  Besides,  depending  on  maize  alone  as  the  sole  source  of  dietary  energy  may  be 
devastating to swine production, because of the frequent drought and locust attack affecting some maize producing areas 
[3]. Inadequate production of maize which is the major conventional energy feed source to meet the energy requirements 
for man, livestock and raw material for industries, created the need to look for cheaper, readily available and alternative 
sources of energy feedstuff for pigs such as yellow cocoyam corm known as “ede uhie” in Igbo[4]. 
 
Cocoyam products are recognized as cheaper carbohydrate sources than grains or other tuber crops. Thus, tannia 
cocoyam (Xanthosoma sagittifolium) is a non-conventional feedstuff that provides readily available energy with easily 
digestible carbohydrate. Xanthosoma sagittifolium is readily found in all hotand humid areas of the world as is cultivated 
extensively throughout West Africa [5] as cited in [2]. It was suggested that tannia cocoyam are now more important than 
taro cocoyam (Colocasia esculenta) being more popular, due to superiority of their corms and cormels in terms of energy, 
proteins and mineral elements[6]. 
 
Cocoyam is a collective name for species of Colocasia and Xanthosoma genera from family of Aracea [7], [8]. 
Cocoyam is  a  herbaceous  annual  and  perennial  crop  with  underground  roots  known  as  corms  which  contains  high 
amount of starch. Xanthosoma sagittifolium is very nutritious and highly productive and yet it’s corms and cormels are 
being under utilized as energy feed resources [9], [5], [10]. The cocoyam corm can be processed into fufu and the 
cormels can also be used in soup thickening or serve as portage with vegetables in Igbo land [9]. It is also a source of 
dietary energy, proteins, vitamins and as well high in potassium, zinc and nicotic acid [11]. 
IJMPR; Volume: 1; Issue: 1; Pages: 22-27        | P a g e - 22 

Cocoyam corms contains anti-nutritional factors such as tannins, hydrocyanid, oxalates, antitrypsin inhibitor [12]; 
[13]. The anti-nutritional factors in the cocoyam corms could be removed through drying, fermentation, cooking and 
toasting to make the product safe for human and livestock consumption [4], [10]. Ndimantang et al. [4], Aboubakar et al. 
[11], Akinmutimi et al.[14], Chandra Subhash et al. [15] observed that Xanthosoma sagittifolium corm meal proved to 
serve  as  good  food  for  both  man  and  livestock  with  its  appreciable  nutritional  profile  and  higher  productivity. 
Ndimantang et al. [4] went further to say that cocoyam corm flour  (Xanthosoma  sagittifolium) contains about 132 
calories  in  a  cup  of  dried  and  ground  corms  of  135  grams,  0.347mg  copper,  0.32mg  of  vitamin  B6,  31.9gm  of 
carbohydrates, 8.07mg of potassium, 1.32mg of iron, 1.131mg of vit. B1, 0.257mg of manganese and 9.74% protein. 
Owusu – Darko, et al. [5], evaluated the potentials of cocoyam corms and cormels and expressed dismay for an under 
utilization and under exploitation of this arable crop by consumers. However, Iwuoha et al. [16], Sheila [17], Dosumu, et 
al. [18], Zhu[19] reported some anti-nutritional factors in cocoyam corms and cormels especially calcium oxalate and 
physico-chemical properties which can hinder their utilization as food if not well processed. In other to proffer solutions 
to these problems posed by these antinutritional factors of cocoyam corms and cormels, Sefa et al. [20], observed that 
calcium oxalate, tannin, hydrocyanid etc could be removed through good processing methods such as drying, soaking or 
cooking and could make the corm meal safe for consumption and for other industrial uses. Matikiti [6], observed that the 
proximate nutritional composition of cocoyam were in the range of 65–78% moisture 2–5% ash, 0.2–1.10% fat, 2.5–5% 
fibre, 14-23% carbohydrates, 390-460mg/100g potassium, 24-43mg/100g calcium, 79-91kcal/cal energy, 4.8% protein 
and 79-110mg/100g magnesium. 
 
The  study  was  therefore  targeted  to  investigate  the  dietary  effects  of  substituting  maize  for  yellow  cocoyam 
(Xanthosoma Sagittifolium) as energy source on weaner pigs. 
 
METHODS AND MATERIALS: 
Location of study 
The experiment was carried out at the Swine unit of the Teaching and Research Farm, University of Uyo, Uyo, 
Akwa Ibom State. Akwa Ibom state is in Nigeria. It is located in the coastal southern part of the country, lying between 
latitudes 40321N and 50331N, and longitudes 70251E and 80251E. The state is located in  the south-South geographical 
zone, and is bordered on the east by Cross River State and Rivers State,, on the west by Abia state, and on the south by 
Atlantic Ocean and the south-most tip of Cross Rivers State. 
 
Collection and preparation of test ingredients 
The cocoyam used for the experiment were gotten from the research farm of University of Uyo, Uyo, Akwa Ibom 
state. The corms were peeled, washed, cut into pieces and sundried for 15 days so that it could be crispy while milling 
using a hammer mill. The dried cocoyam corm meal (DCCM) was taken to the laboratory for proximate analysis. Four 
weaner diets; T1 (control), T2, T3 and T4 were formulated in which dried cocoyam corm meal was added to partially 
replace maize at 0%, 20%, 40% and 6a0% respectively. 
 
Experimental Animals 
A total of 16 weaner pigs of large white were used for the study. The pigs were divided into 4 groups based on 
average initial weights (20-25kg) and each group of grower pigs were respectively allocated to each of the four treatment 
diets in a completely randomized design (CRD). Each treatment group contained 2 replicates of 4 pigs (2male and 
2female). The experimental animals were dewormed for two weeks before the test was administered. The animals were 
fed twice daily and water supplied ad-libitium. 
 
Data Collection 
Feed Intake and Live Weight Gain: At the beginning of the experiment, the pigs were weighed on a daily basis prior 
to feeding in the morning and evening. The initial live weight was subtracted from the final live weight to determine the 
weight gained by the animals. Feeds offered and remnants were weighed daily to determine the feed intake  of the 
animals. Both values were used to determine Feed Conversion Ratio (FCR). 
 
Statistical analysis: 
Data were subjected to analysis of variance using the procedure outlined by SAS and significantly different means 
were separated using the Multiple range test by Duncan. 
 
RESULT AND DISCUSSION: 
 
Table1.Composition of Experimental Diet for Weaner Pig 
Ingredients  T1 (0%)  T2(20% )  T3 (40% )  T4 (60%) 
Maize  60.00  40.00  20.00  0.00 
Cocoyam corm meal  0.00  20.00  40.00  60.00 
IJMPR; Volume: 1; Issue: 1; Pages: 22-27        | P a g e - 23 

| Ingredients       |   T1 (0%) |   T2(20% ) |   T3 (40% ) |   T4 (60%) |
|:------------------|----------:|-----------:|------------:|-----------:|
| Maize             |        60 |         40 |          20 |          0 |
| Cocoyam corm meal |         0 |         20 |          40 |         60 |

Soya bean meal  15.00  15.00  15.00  15.00 
Fish meal  4.00  4.00  4.00  4.00 
Blood meal  1.00  1.00  1.00  1.00 
Wheat Offal  24.10  24.72  24.51  24.25 
Palm kernel cake  10.30  10.30  10.30  10.30 
Bone Meal  1.50  1.50  1.50  1.50 
Limestone  2.00  2.00  2.00  2.00 
Weaner Premix*  0.25  0.25  0.25  0.25 
Salt  0.35  0.35  0.35  0.35 
L- Lysine  0.20  0.20  0.20  0.20 
Total  100.00  100.00  100.00  100.00 
Calculated Analysis:         
Dry Matter  92.00  89.23  88.83  87.28 
Crude Protein (%)  19.00  21.00  23.00  25.00 
Ether extract  7.48  5.19  4.58  2.60 
ME(Keal/Kg)  2978  2957  2935  2913 
Fibre (%)  5.35  6.99  8.63  10.26 
Ash (%)  5.94  9.11  12.34  15.57 
Phosphorus (%)  36.23  40.23  42.48  44.25 
Lysine (%)  0.21  0.43  4.06  6.32 
Calcium (%)  46.01  34.23  25.28  33.23 
Cellulose  34.00  23.98  13.32  22.99 
Methionine (%)  6.32  8.86  6.99  13.34 
 
 
Table 2: Proximate Composition of Cocoyam corm meal 
Ingredients  Composition 
Crude fibre (%)  5.60 
Crude protein (%)  8.10 
Ash (%)  3.89 
Ether EXtract (%)  5.00 
Moisture  79.00 
Dry Matter  80.10 
Nitrogen Free Extract  47.87 
ME (Kcal/kg)  2421.98Kcal/kgDM 
 
Metabolizable = (37 × %CP) + (81.8 × %FAT) + (35.5 × %NFE) ME metabolizable 
 
Table 2 shows the proximate analysis of dried cocoyam corm meal (Xanthosoma sagittifolium) used for this study. The 
crude fibre, crude protein, ash, ether extract moisture, dry matter, nitrogen free extract and metabolizable energy are: 
5.60%, 8.10%, 3.89%, 5.00%, 79.00%, 80.10%, 47.87% and 2421.98Kcal/kgDM respectively. These values were in line 
with the  values obtained by Sarla et al.[21] and Okonkwo [2]. 
 
Table 2: Growth Performance characteristics of pigs fed experimental diet 
Levels of inclusion (%) 
  0  20  40  60   
Parameters  1  2  3  4  SEM (±) 
Ave. initial weight(kg)  9.05  8.98  9.00  9.01   
Ave. final weight(kg)  28.84b  30.67 a  25.00 c  38.50 d  0.46 
Ave. total weight gain(kg)  12.52 b  23.79 a  16.00 d  30.50 cd  0.44 
Ave. daily weight gain(kg)  2.07 b  2.40 a  2.06 c  1.78 cd  0.64 
Feed intake(kg)  35.00  35.00  35.00  35.00  0.01 
Feed conversion ratio  2.31 c  2.16 d  2.69 b  2.80 b  0.68 
Protein efficiency ratio  2.18 b  2.52 a  1.95 c  1.88 cd  0.08 
Mortality (%)  -  -  -  -  - 
a , b, c, d, e means along the same row with different superscripts are significantly (p< 0.05) different from each 
at her, Ave: Average, SEM: Standard error of mean and Makikiti [6]. 
IJMPR; Volume: 1; Issue: 1; Pages: 22-27        | P a g e - 24 

| Soya bean meal       | 15.00   | 15.00   | 15.00   | 15.00   |
|:---------------------|:--------|:--------|:--------|:--------|
| Fish meal            | 4.00    | 4.00    | 4.00    | 4.00    |
| Blood meal           | 1.00    | 1.00    | 1.00    | 1.00    |
| Wheat Offal          | 24.10   | 24.72   | 24.51   | 24.25   |
| Palm kernel cake     | 10.30   | 10.30   | 10.30   | 10.30   |
| Bone Meal            | 1.50    | 1.50    | 1.50    | 1.50    |
| Limestone            | 2.00    | 2.00    | 2.00    | 2.00    |
| Weaner Premix*       | 0.25    | 0.25    | 0.25    | 0.25    |
| Salt                 | 0.35    | 0.35    | 0.35    | 0.35    |
| L- Lysine            | 0.20    | 0.20    | 0.20    | 0.20    |
| Total                | 100.00  | 100.00  | 100.00  | 100.00  |
| Calculated Analysis: |         |         |         |         |
| Dry Matter           | 92.00   | 89.23   | 88.83   | 87.28   |
| Crude Protein (%)    | 19.00   | 21.00   | 23.00   | 25.00   |
| Ether extract        | 7.48    | 5.19    | 4.58    | 2.60    |
| ME(Keal/Kg)          | 2978    | 2957    | 2935    | 2913    |
| Fibre (%)            | 5.35    | 6.99    | 8.63    | 10.26   |
| Ash (%)              | 5.94    | 9.11    | 12.34   | 15.57   |
| Phosphorus (%)       | 36.23   | 40.23   | 42.48   | 44.25   |
| Lysine (%)           | 0.21    | 0.43    | 4.06    | 6.32    |
| Calcium (%)          | 46.01   | 34.23   | 25.28   | 33.23   |
| Cellulose            | 34.00   | 23.98   | 13.32   | 22.99   |
| Methionine (%)       | 6.32    | 8.86    | 6.99    | 13.34   |

| Ingredients           | Composition      |
|:----------------------|:-----------------|
| Crude fibre (%)       | 5.60             |
| Crude protein (%)     | 8.10             |
| Ash (%)               | 3.89             |
| Ether EXtract (%)     | 5.00             |
| Moisture              | 79.00            |
| Dry Matter            | 80.10            |
| Nitrogen Free Extract | 47.87            |
| ME (Kcal/kg)          | 2421.98Kcal/kgDM |

| Levels of inclusion (%)    | None    | None    | None    | None     | None    |
|:---------------------------|:--------|:--------|:--------|:---------|:--------|
|                            | 0       | 20      | 40      | 60       |         |
| Parameters                 | 1       | 2       | 3       | 4        | SEM (±) |
| Ave. initial weight(kg)    | 9.05    | 8.98    | 9.00    | 9.01     |         |
| Ave. final weight(kg)      | 28.84b  | 30.67 a | 25.00 c | 38.50 d  | 0.46    |
| Ave. total weight gain(kg) | 12.52 b | 23.79 a | 16.00 d | 30.50 cd | 0.44    |
| Ave. daily weight gain(kg) | 2.07 b  | 2.40 a  | 2.06 c  | 1.78 cd  | 0.64    |
| Feed intake(kg)            | 35.00   | 35.00   | 35.00   | 35.00    | 0.01    |
| Feed conversion ratio      | 2.31 c  | 2.16 d  | 2.69 b  | 2.80 b   | 0.68    |
| Protein efficiency ratio   | 2.18 b  | 2.52 a  | 1.95 c  | 1.88 cd  | 0.08    |
| Mortality (%)              | -       | -       | -       | -        | -       |

The result of the performance of layer hens fed dried cocoyam corm meal are shown in Table 3. Feed intake 
increased as the levels of dried cocoyam corm meal increased in the diets though there were no significant (P>0.05) 
difference among the treatment groups, T4 had the highest (P<0.05) feed intake among other groups while T1 had the 
least (P<0.05). The results of feed intake obtained in this study are in agreement with observations of Esonu  [22] and 
[23], Ndimetang et al. [4] who reported that cocoyam corm meals were very rich in nutrients and very palatable and 
therefore increases its acceptability in swine diets. On body weight gain, pigs placed on diets 2 (T2) had significance 
(P<0.05) least weight gain among the treatment groups, T1 group and T3 were the same (P>0.05) while T4 had the 
highest  (P<0.05)  weight  gain  among  other  groups.  This  obviously  implies  that  cocoyam  corm  meal  (Xanthosoma 
sagittifolium) improved adequate weight gain that are required for maximum meat production. This is in agreement with 
Okonkwo [2] who stated that growth require synthesis of new body tissues and the raw materials for growth have to be 
provided  through  feed  and  feedstuffs  that  are  adequate  for  it.  In  weaner  pigs  that  are  reared  for  other  purposes, 
production however is influenced by growth which has to be attained to a particular point (1.5 to 2kg). Moreso, higher 
feed intake of T4 pigs did not match the meat production value recorded in this study. This experiment showed that 20% 
inclusion of cocoyam corm meal supported meat production, body weight and feed efficiency more than 20% inclusion 
(T4). On feed conversion efficiency, T4had the highest (P<0.05) (2.80) among other groups followed by T3(2.69) and 
then T1(2.31) and T2 (2.16) which had the lowest (P<0.05), though there were no significant (P>0.05) difference among 
the treatment groups on feed conversion ratio. This is in line with Iheukwumere  et al. [24] and Esonu [23]  who stated 
that  weaners  pig  diets  should  be  adequate  with  regard  to  essential  nutrients  to  improve  feed  efficiency  and  feed 
utilization. Also, Effiong et al. [25], Singh et al. [26] reported positive influence on pig day production, body weight and 
feed efficiency on pigs fed adequate diets in terms of quality and quantity. It is important to state here that as at the time 
this experiment was carried out, very little information was available on the inclusion of yellow cocoyam corm meal 
Xanthosoma (sagittifolium) as feed ingredient in weaner pig diets. 
 
Table 4: Haematological indices of parameter of weaner pigsfed  with Cocoyam corm meal (CCM) Based Diet 
  Parameters  T1 (0%)  T2 (20%)  T3 (40%)  T4 (60%)  SEM 
  HB(g/dl)  11.97  11.77  11.68  11.73  0.88 
  PVC (%)  33.08  31.63  31.88  31.88  2.66 
RBC(x106/UL)  2.56  2.59  2.69  2.53  0.27 
 
MCV (fl)  131.98 a  125.18 b  126.85ab  126.85ab  5.23 
 
MCH (pg)  38.88 a  38.88 b  37.53 b  37.53b  1.19 
 
MCHC (%)  29.03 b  31.02 a  29.33 b  29.55ab  1.38 
 
PLT (x103/UL)  22.67 a  20.83 a  18.33 a  20.50 a  1.37 
 
WBC (x103/UL)  83.78 a  73.13 ab  82.00 ab  75.33 b  6.15 
 
LYM(%)  77.67 c  83.83 abc  81.00 bc  87.67ab  7.76 
NEUT (%)  22.33 a  16.17 abc  19.00 ab  12.33bc  8.00 
  a,b,c Means in the same row with different super script are significantly different 
The results of haematological analysis of weaner pigs fed dried cocoyam corm meal are shown 
in Table 4 above. 
 
Hematological parameters such as hemoglobin, packed cell volume, red blood cell volume tend to decrease as the 
levels of cocoyam corm meal increased in the diets but did not follow a definite order. Moreso, all the values obtained 
were within the normal range for pigs which were in line with Merck, [27]. The mean cell haemoglobin concentration 
increased (P<0.05) for pigs fed high inclusion levels of cocoyam corm meal in their diets. T2 had the highest (P<0.05) 
cell  hemoglobin  concentration  (31.02pg)  followed  by  T4  (29.55pg)  which  differed  significantly  (P<0.05)  from  T1 
(29.03pg). The white blood cell count values did not differ significantly (P>0.05) among the treatment groups and all the 
values. These indicate the normal body functions of hens and the absence of infection in all the treatment groups. This is 
in line with Awuyobi et al. [28], [29], Iheukwumere et al. [24] who stated that haematological parameters are an index 
and reflection of the effects of dietary treatment on the animal in terms of type quality and quantity ingested to meet the 
physiological, biological, biochemical and metabolic necessities of the body. In this study, none of the haematological 
parameters evaluated had any adverse effect on the weaner pigs as well as meat production, and an indication that the 
dried cocoyam corm meal is an ideal feed ingredient and could replace maize in weaner pigs diets up to 20% level in 
their diets without any deleterious effect on the overall performance. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
This study was conducted to evaluate the dietary effects of substituting maize for yellow cocoyam (Xanthosoma 
Sagittifolium) as energy source for weaner pigs. A total of 16 weaner pigs of large white were randomly selected at the 
Swine unit of the Teaching and Research Farm, University of Uyo, Uyo, Akwa Ibom State and used for the study. The 
pigs  were  divided  into  4  groups  based  on  average  initial  weights  (20-25kg)  and  each  group  of  grower  pigs  were 
IJMPR; Volume: 1; Issue: 1; Pages: 22-27        | P a g e - 25 

| Parameters    | T1 (0%)   | T2 (20%)   | T3 (40%)   | T4 (60%)   |   SEM |
|:--------------|:----------|:-----------|:-----------|:-----------|------:|
| HB(g/dl)      | 11.97     | 11.77      | 11.68      | 11.73      |  0.88 |
| PVC (%)       | 33.08     | 31.63      | 31.88      | 31.88      |  2.66 |
| RBC(x106/UL)  | 2.56      | 2.59       | 2.69       | 2.53       |  0.27 |
| MCV (fl)      | 131.98 a  | 125.18 b   | 126.85ab   | 126.85ab   |  5.23 |
| MCH (pg)      | 38.88 a   | 38.88 b    | 37.53 b    | 37.53b     |  1.19 |
| MCHC (%)      | 29.03 b   | 31.02 a    | 29.33 b    | 29.55ab    |  1.38 |
| PLT (x103/UL) | 22.67 a   | 20.83 a    | 18.33 a    | 20.50 a    |  1.37 |
| WBC (x103/UL) | 83.78 a   | 73.13 ab   | 82.00 ab   | 75.33 b    |  6.15 |
| LYM(%)        | 77.67 c   | 83.83 abc  | 81.00 bc   | 87.67ab    |  7.76 |
| NEUT (%)      | 22.33 a   | 16.17 abc  | 19.00 ab   | 12.33bc    |  8    |

respectively allocated to each of the four treatment diets in a completely randomized design (CRD).  Each  treatment 
group  contained  2  replicates  of  4  pigs  (4male  and  4female).  These  pigs  were  fed  twice  daily  and  water  supplied 
adlibitium. The treatment diets consisted of the following of pineapple waste mixed with malted sorghum meal at 0 
(controlled), 20, 40, 60% replacement of maize in the control diet were formulated. The study utilized a randomized 
design and the statistics used in analyzing the result in the study were mean+stem and one way Analysis of variance 
(ANOVA). 
 
Data were collected on growth performance and blood profile. There was a significance difference (P> 0.05) of 
cocoyam  corm  meal  on  the growth  performance  of  weaner  pigs.  This  implies  that  feeding  weaner  pigs  with  dried 
cocoyam corm meal (Xanthosoma sagittifolium) based diets improved feed intake, body weight gain, body weight and 
feed conversion efficiency. 
 
No significant differences (P>0.05) were observed on all blood profile parameters measured except the albumin and 
creatinine. The albumin and creatinine values ranged from 2.63-3.52 g/dl and 0.90- 1.50mg/dl respectively. It can be 
concluded that grower pigs fed 20% MSPW based diet yielded best results in terms of performance and there was no 
detrimental effect on their blood profile. Finally, on a general note, the result of this study showed that 40% of cocoyam 
corm meal (Xanthosoma sagittifolium) could be included in the diets of weaner pigs without any adverse effects on the 
performance and blood parameters. It is therefore recommended that cocoyam corm meal; 
i.  Should be encouraged in the feeding of pigs to reduce over dependence of maize feeds by our farmers which 
have led to high cost of raising monogastrics specifically pigs which thereby discouraged farmers from investing 
in the swine business. 
ii.  For swine farmers and swine nutritionists whose target is primarily on improvement of feed efficiency and body 
weight weaner pigs, the result of this study showed that 20% dried cocoyam corm meal replacement of maize 
will meet that need, hence, it is recommended. 
 
REFERENCES 
1.  Obidinma, V.N. (2009). Brewer’s dried grain as energy source in poultry production. A Ph.D.of taro: Ethinobotany 
and Conservation. Rome Italy: Biodiversity International. Google Scholar. 
2.  Esiegwu,  A.C.  and  V.N.  Okonkwo  (2018).  Growth performance  and blood  indices  of  finisher  pigs  fed  enzyme 
fortified (maxi-grain) rice milling waste. Journal ofAgriculture and Food Sciences, 16(1), 24-32. 
3.  Agwunobi, L. N. and E. A. Essien, (1995). The Performance of Weaner pigs on Sweet Potato Diets.  Journal of 
Agricultural Technology Vol. 3 No. 1, NBTE. pp 69-74. 
4.  Ndimantang, B. C., O. & Asinobi, N. O. (2006). The effect of different processing method on some anti-nutritional 
factors content of Ede Uhie (Xanthosoma sagittifolium) and edeocha (Colocasia esculenta). International Journal of 
Agriculture and Rural Development, 7(2), 7-14. 
5.  Owusu-Darko, P.G., Paterson, A. and Omenyo, E.L. (2014). Cocoyam (corms and cormels) an under exploited food 
and feed resource. Journal of Agricultural Chemistry and Environment,  03(01), 22-29. 
6.  Matikiti, A. Allemann, J., Kujeke, G. Gasura, E., Masekesa, T. and Chabata, I. (2017). Nutritional Composition of 
Cocoyam (Colocasia esculenta) Asian Journal ofAgriculture and Rural Development, vol. 7(3), 48-55. 
7.  Opara, L.U. (2003). Edible Aroids Post-harvest operation in: Post – Harvest Compendium,Massey University Food 
and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome: Italy-Google Scholar. 
8.  Ramanatha, R.V., P.T. Mathews, P.B. Eyzaguire and D. Hunter, (2010). The global diversityof taro: Ethinobotany 
and Conservation. Rome Italy: Biodiversity International. Google Scholar. 
9.  Onu,  P.N.  and  F.N., Madubuike  (2006).  Effect  of Raw and  Cooked  Wild  Cocoyam  (Caladium  bicolor)  on the 
performance of broiler chicks. Internation Journal of Poultry Sciences 39,268-273. 
10.  Eyasu, W. Tileye, T. and Kassahu, T. (2019). Proximate mineral and anti-nutrient contents ofcocoyam (Xanthosoma 
sagittifolium) (L.) Schott. International Journal of Food Science, https://doi.org/10.1155/2019/8965476. 
11.  Aboubakar,  N.  Njinteng,  Y.N.  Schar,  J.  and  Mbofung,  C.M.F.  (2008).  Physico-chemical  internal  properties  and 
micro-structure of six (6) varieties of taro (Colocasia esculenta flours and starches). Journal of Food Engineering 
86(2), 294-305. 
12.  Okeke, C.O. (2012). Utilization of Cassava, sweet potato and cocoyam meals as dietary sources for poultry. World 
Journal of Engineering and Pure Applied Sciences, 2(3), 63-68. 
13.  Hang, D.T. and L.V. Binh, (2013). Oxalate concentration in taro leaves and petioles and effect of added calcium on 
nitrogen retention in pigs given diets containing 50% ensiled taro leaves and petioles. Livestock Research for Rural 
development, 25, 65, http://www.Irrd.org/Irrd25/4/hang25065.htm. 
14.  Akinmutimi, A. H., Amaechi, N., Onogu, M., (2006). Evaluation of raw African yam bean meal as substitute for soya 
bean meal in the diets of weaner rabbits. Journal of Animal Veternary Advanced 5(11), 907-911. 
15.  Chandra S., Saklani, S.,  & Singh, J. (2012). Phyto-chemical Screening of GARHWAL HIMALAYA wild edible 
tuber Colocasia esculenta. Research Journal of Paramcy, ISSN 22308407. 
IJMPR; Volume: 1; Issue: 1; Pages: 22-27        | P a g e - 26 

16.  Iwuoha,  C.I.  and  Kalu,  F.A.  (1995).  Calcium  oxalate  and  physico-chemical  properties  of  cocoyam  (Colocasia 
esculenta and Xanthosoma sagittifolium) tuber flours as affected   by processing Journal of Food Chemistry  vol. 
54(1), 61-66. 
17.  Sheila, C.N. and Geoffrey, S. (1999). Oxalate Content of Foods and its effect on humans. Asia Pacific Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition 8(1), 64-74. 
18.  Dosumu, O.O., Oluwaniyi, O.O. Awolola, G.V., Bashiru, M.O. and Oyedeji, O.O.(2012). Antimicrobial properties of 
three  Nigerian  condiments.  Nigeria  Food  Journal,  Official.  Journal  of  Nigeria  Institute  of  Food  Science  and 
Technology, 30(1), 43-52. 
19.  Zhu, F. (2016). Buck wheat Starch: Structure, Properties and Applications. Journal of Trends in Food Science and 
Technology, vol. 49, pp. 121-135. 
20.  Sefa Dedeh, S., and Agyir Sackey,  E.K. (2004). Chemical Composition and the effect of processing on oxalate 
content of cocoyam  (Xanthosoma sagittifolium)  and Colocasia esculenta  cormels. Food Chemistry, 85, 479-487. 
Crossing CAS Web of Science @ Google Scholar. 
21.  Sarla, S. Sublash, C. and Kothiyal, S., J. (2012). Phyto-chemical screening of Garhwali Himalaya wild edible tuber 
(Colocosia esculenta). International Research Journal of  Pharmacy, 3(3), 181. 
22.  Esonu,  B.O.  (2000a).  Animal  Nutrition  and  Feeding:  A  Functional  Approach.  Rukzed  and  Rucksons  Associates 
Owerri, Nigeria. 
23.  Esonu, B.O. (2000b). Effect of dietary cooked wild variegated cocoyam (Caladium hortulanium) on performance of 
broiler chickens. Tropical Agriculture, 77(4), 269- 271 
24.  Iheukwumere, F.C. Ndubuisi, E.C., Mazi, E.A. and Onyekwere, M.U. (2008). Performance Nutrient Utilization and 
Organ characteristics of broiler finishers fed cassava leaf meal  (Manihot esculenta Crantz). Pakistan Journal of 
Nutrition, 7(1),13-16. 
25.  Effiong, O.O., William, M.E. and Eyoh, G.D. (2015). Laying performance and egg quality evaluation of pullets fed 
diets containing graded levels of processed Horse eye bean (Mucuna urens) meal. Journal of Agriculture and Life 
Sciences, 2(1), 140-145. 
26.  Singh, V., Tyagi, P.K., Mandal, A.B., and Singh, S. (2013). Reducing egg cholesterol through dietary addition of 
ginger and garlic in quails. Indian Journal of Poultry  Science, 48(3), 306-312. 
27.  Merck,  Veterinary  Manual  (2012).  Haematological  Reference  Ranges.  Retreived  November  1,  2020,  from: 
http://www.merckmanual.com. 
28.  Awujiobi, H.A. and Opia, G.O. (2002). The effect of psychological status on some blood parameters of the Newzea 
Land White Doe Rabbits. Proc. of 7th Annual Conf. of Animal Science Association of Nigeria, (ASAN) Sept., 16th 
to 19th 2002, University of Agriculture. Abeokuta. 
29.  Ewuola, E.O., Folayan, O.A., Gbore, F.A. Adewumi, A.L., Akanji, R.A., Ogunlade, J.T., Adeneye, J.A. (2004). 
Physiological response of growing West African dwarf goats fed groundnut shell-based diets as the concentrate 
supplements. Bowen Journal of Agriculture 1(1), 61-69. 
IJMPR; Volume: 1; Issue: 1; Pages: 22-27        | P a g e - 27 