featexp
Feature exploration for supervised learning. Helps with feature understanding, identifying noisy fea‑
tures, feature debugging, leakage detection and model monitoring.
Installation
pip install featexp
Using featexp
Detailed Medium post on using featexp. Translations from web: Chinese, Russian
featexp draws plots similar to partial dependence plots, but directly from data instead of using a
trainedmodellikecurrentimplementationsofpdpdo. Sinceitdrawsplotsfromdatadirectly,ithelps
with understanding the features well and building better ML models.
1 from featexp import get_univariate_plots
2 get_univariate_plots(data=data_train, target_col='target', data_test=
data_test, features_list=['DAYS_EMPLOYED'])
3
4 # data_test and features_list are optional.
5 # Draws plots for all columns if features_list not passed
6 # Draws only train data plots if no test_data passed
1

| 1 from featexp import get_univariate_plots                              |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2 get_univariate_plots(data=data_train, target_col='target', data_test= |
| data_test, features_list=['DAYS_EMPLOYED'])                             |
| 3                                                                       |
| 4 # data_test and features_list are optional.                           |
| 5 # Draws plots for all columns if features_list not passed             |
| 6 # Draws only train data plots if no test_data passed                  |

featexp bins a feature into equal population bins and shows the mean value of the dependent
variable (target) in each bin. Here’s how to read these plots:
1. The trend plot on the left helps you understand the relationship between target and feature.
2. Population distribution helps you make sure the feature is correct.
3. Also, shows the number of trend direction changes and the correlation between train and test
trendwhichcanbeusedtoidentifynoisyfeatures. Ahighnumberoftrendchangesorlowtrend
correlation implies high noise.
2

Exampleofanoisyfeature: Haslowtrendcorrelation
Getting binned feature stats
Returns mean target and population in each bin of a feature
1 from featexp import univariate_plotter
2 binned_data_train, binned_data_test = univariate_plotter(data=
data_train, target_col='target', feature='DAYS_EMPLOYED', data_test=
data_test)
3 # For only train data
4 binned_data_train = univariate_plotter(data=data_train, target_col='
target', feature='DAYS_EMPLOYED')
3

| 1 from featexp import univariate_plotter                               |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2 binned_data_train, binned_data_test = univariate_plotter(data=       |
| data_train, target_col='target', feature='DAYS_EMPLOYED', data_test=   |
| data_test)                                                             |
| 3 # For only train data                                                |
| 4 binned_data_train = univariate_plotter(data=data_train, target_col=' |
| target', feature='DAYS_EMPLOYED')                                      |

Getting stats for all features
Returns trend changes and trend correlation for all features in a dataframe
1 from featexp import get_trend_stats_feature
2 stats = get_trend_stats(data=data_train, target_col='target', data_test
=data_test)
3
4 # data_test is optional. If not passed, trend correlations aren't
calculated.
Returns a dataframe with trend changes and trend correlation which can be used for dropping the
noisyfeatures,etc.
Leakage detection
It helps with identifying why a feature is leaky which helps with debugging.
4

| 1 from featexp import get_trend_stats_feature                             |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2 stats = get_trend_stats(data=data_train, target_col='target', data_test |
| =data_test)                                                               |
| 3                                                                         |
| 4 # data_test is optional. If not passed, trend correlations aren't       |
| calculated.                                                               |

Nulls have 0% mean target and 100% mean target in other bins. Implies this feature is populated
only for target = 1.
Citing featexp
5