Investigating Gender Perceptions on Technology Use in Pakistan ELT Classrooms      BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 3(4)” 
 
DOI Number of the Paper: https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.00000 
Link of the Paper: https://jar.bwo.org.pk/index.php/jarh/article/view/385 
Edition Link: Journal of Academic Research for Humanities JARH, 4(1) January-March 2024 
HJRS Link: Journal of Academic Research for Humanities JARH (HEC-Recognized for 2023-2024) 
 
 
INVESTIGATING GENDER PERCEPTIONS ON TECHNOLOGY USE IN PAKISTANI ELT 
CLASSROOMS: A SURVEY-BASED STUDY 
Corresponding &  RAHAT BATOOL, M.Phil. Scholar, Dept. of Applied Linguistics, GC University, 
Author 1:  Faisalabad, Pakistan, Email: rahatbatool997@gmail.com 
Co-Author 2:  DR. FAQIR M. ASLAM RANA, Lecturer, English Language Unit, University of 
Technology and Applied Sciences, Salalah, Sultanate of Oman, faqir.rana@utas.edu.om 
Co-Author 3:  DR. HAFIZ MUHAMMAD QASIM, Assistant Professor, Dept. of Applied 
Linguistics, GC University, Faisalabad. Pakistan, Email: muhammadqasim@gcuf.edu.pk 
___________________________________________________________________________________ 
Paper Information        Abstract 
Citation of the paper:   QR Code for the  Students'  motivation  is  increased  when  they  use  the 
(JARH) Batool, R., Rana, F. M. A.,  Paper:  internet. The importance of information and communication 
Qasim,  H.  M.  (2023).  technology in course books has evolved in all educational 
Investigating  Gender  fields to move towards modern methods of teaching. This 
Perceptions on Technology Use 
research was based on inspecting the perception of males 
in  Pakistan  ELT  Classrooms:  A 
and  females  concerning  the  use  of  technology  in  English 
Survey-Based Study. In Journal 
language  teaching  classrooms  by  utilizing  quantitative 
of  Academic  Research  for 
research procedures.  The perception of gender towards the 
Humanities, 4(1), 00–00.  
 
utilization  of  technology  in  ELT  classrooms  was  explored 
 
through a questionnaire. The survey was administered on 
Subject Areas for JARH: 
the  accessibility  and  readiness  of  the  contributors.  The 
1 Education 
sample  size  (N=90)  comprises  English  Language  students 
2 Humanities  
from various classes at the University of Okara (Department 
Timeline of the Paper at JARH: 
of English Language). The results of the study revealed that 
Received on: 07-01-2024 
females  have  greater  knowledge  of  English  language 
Reviews Completed on: 16-02-2024 
learning  and  technological  integration  in  ELT  due  to 
Accepted on: 25-02-2024 
Online on: 08-03-2024  variations in these values and also females have a larger 
License:  tendency to favour the use of technology in ELT classes than 
males.  The  findings  elucidated  that  technology  has 
  profoundly  shaped  our  societal  fabric,  exerting  distinct 
permutations  upon  our  collective  ethos  and  cognitive 
Creative  Commons  Attribution-Share  Alike  4.0 
International License  paradigms.  By  taking  into  account  any  potential  gender-
Recognized for BWO-R:  based prejudices or barriers, educators may create a more 
thorough  and  beneficial  learning  environment  that 
motivates all students to actively engage with technology. 
 
Keywords: Technology, Integration, Gender, Societal 
Published by  : 
BWO Researches INTL.
Impact, Teaching Strategies, English Language Learning 
   
DOI Image of the paper: 
   
 
58
 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| Corresponding &   | RAHAT BATOOL, M.Phil. Scholar, Dept. of Applied Linguistics, GC University,         |
| Author 1:         | Faisalabad, Pakistan, Email: rahatbatool997@gmail.com                               |
|:------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Co-Author 2:      | DR. FAQIR M. ASLAM RANA, Lecturer, English Language Unit, University of             |
|                   | Technology and Applied Sciences, Salalah, Sultanate of Oman, faqir.rana@utas.edu.om |
| Co-Author 3:      | DR. HAFIZ MUHAMMAD QASIM, Assistant Professor, Dept. of Applied                     |
|                   | Linguistics, GC University, Faisalabad. Pakistan, Email: muhammadqasim@gcuf.edu.pk  |

Investigating Gender Perceptions on Technology Use in Pakistan ELT Classrooms        BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 3(4)” 
Introduction  produce learners for the personnel (Brown & 
In  English  as  a  second  language  (ESL),  the  Cuban, 2001). The importance of information 
study  of  gender  has  been  utilized  as  a  and  communication  technology  in  course 
foundation,  and  it  has  discovered  virtually  books has evolved in all educational fields to 
exposition to replicate womanly dominance in  move  towards  modern methods  of teaching. 
language  learning.  Gender  differences  in  ESL  (Hismanoğlu, 2011).  
classroom  teaching  have  been  discovered  in  Purpose Statement 
studies.  Some  academics  query  whether  Pakistan  is  a  developing  country  that 
gender is even a worthwhile theme to study  recognizes  the  value  of  technology  in  the 
and  whether  women  have  higher  language  educational system. This research will analyze 
skills. This research paper investigates the part  what  males  and  females  perceive  about  this 
of gender in learning. It is assumed that women  integration. The perception of students toward 
do not outperform males in second language,  technology  based  on  gender  in  Pakistan,  as 
or second language, skills. (McCaughan, 2009).  well  as  how  students  perceived  the  use  of 
Van Dijk (1998) supposes that “if there is one  technology in the classroom based on gender, 
vast field of critical research on discourse and  and the reasons for this. 
language  that  thus  far  was  not  carried  out  Research Objectives 
within a CDA perspective, it is that of gender”.  1.  To  explore  the  perception  of  males  and 
“Gender equality has been examined not only  females  regarding  the  practice  of 
in the ELT domain but also in other powerful  technology  in  English  Language  Teaching 
media including print media and mass media”  classrooms 
(Chanzanagh & Haghpors, 2010; Danova, 2006;  2.  To  explore  which  class  of  gender  mostly 
del-Teso-Craviotto,  2006;  Goffman,  1976;  prefer  by  using  technology  in  ELT 
Isanovic,  2006;  Ohara  &  Saft,  2003).  classrooms 
Furthermore,  incorporating  cutting-edge  Questions of Research 
technology, in particular, into ELT pedagogy, is  1.  What  is  the  perception  of  males  and 
expected to result in significant changes (Iqbal  females  about  practicing  technology  in 
&  Rafi,  2018).  In  the  21st  century,  vigorous  English Language Teaching classrooms? 
English  ideologies  and  presumed  tensions  2.  Which class of gender mostly prefers using 
imitate  one  of  the  difficulties  of  ELT.  The  technology in ELT classrooms? 
designation of "English" for example, institute  Significance of the Study 
theme is being called into question, as it may  The study is significant since it will provide 
be  motivated  by  theoretical  civilizations  and  new  ideas  and  methods  of  thinking  for 
the essential for dispositive in place of a move  philosophers as well as a way for students to 
to  a  cross-functional  topic  of  the  statement  obtain assistance and experts to develop. More 
(Larsen-Freeman  &  Freeman,  2008;  Leung  &  study  in  the  realm  of  technology  in  ELT  is 
Valdes,  2019).  Teachers  must  constantly  required.  On  the  advantages  of  using 
theorize  and  paradigm  practice,  information,  technology  in  language  acquisition  generally, 
and opinions to give nearby pertinent ELT as a  the results of the current study are anticipated 
result of the evolution of the topic criticism and  to be clear. The study's findings may be useful 
the  variety  of  instructional  contexts.  to  a  variety  of  people.  Additionally,  this 
(Kumaravadivelu, 2001, 2006). It is frequently  research may benefit educators by simplifying 
postulated  that  technology  in  language  their  roles,  as  well  as  students  by  assisting 
learning will make learners more vigorous and  them  in  easily  and  smoothly  absorbing  the 
well-organized,  will  upgrade  learning  and  English language with technology. Last but not 
teaching, will contribute to actual and winsome  least, this work can motivate more research on 
learning  outcomes,  and  will  one  step  ahead  the  same  subject  by  other  scholars,  which 
1 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Investigating Gender Perceptions on Technology Use in Pakistan ELT Classrooms        BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 3(4)” 
would  enhance  both  domestic  and  foreign  supplement outdated instructions and can be 
literature.  engaging  for  students.  (Ahmed,  2017).  One 
Literature Review  achievable  educational  implementation  is  to 
2.1. English Language Teaching (ELT)  intermix  English  songs  into  ELT.  This  study 
The  figure  of  surveys  into  the  research  contributes  conceptual  dissension  and 
inclinations of a scientific area has increased in  practical assistance to utilize English songs in 
recent decades. Relevant studies, for example,  ELT. (Shen, 2003). 
in the fields of English language teaching and  2.2. Uses of Technology in English Language 
learning and applied linguistics, (Hsu, 2005; Ker,  Learning  
Adams & Skyrme, 2013; Lazaraton, 2000; Liu &  The  ignored  ICT  devices  should  never  be 
Zhang, 2015; Richards, 2009; Yihong, Lichun &  included  in  the  lessons  (Murat  Hismanoğlu, 
Jun  2001)  have  scattered  knowledge  around  2011).  This  study  justified  the  use  and 
research  application.  For  example,  Lazaraton  development of ICT, as well as its impact on ELT 
(2000) identifies one of the challenging matters  over  the  last  three  years.  According  to  this 
that  applied  linguistics  experts  seem  to  development, it not only affected classrooms 
deficiency in terms of their aptitude to conduct  but  also  encouraged  teachers  to  teach 
experiential research. Lazaraton also contends  languages.  The  taxonomies  of  CALL's 
that figures should be used in conjunction with  implementation  by  Stephen  Bax  and  Mark 
the  fundamental  features,  and  disdain  her  Warschauer  are  used  for  this  purpose.  They 
normal  use  of  ANOVA,  the  researcher  also  followed  the  teaching  and  language 
expresses  concern  about  the  accuracy  of  learning  development  methods  from  the 
statistical  procedures.  Lazaraton  (2005)  beginning to the end of CALL (1980 to 1990) 
examined published articles over eleven years  from CALL to WEB 2.0. Finally, they examined a 
in her subsequent study. The majority of the  summary  of  the  future  implications  of 
research (86%) in the four papers under review  technology for ELT learning. (Gavin Dudeney & 
used measurable methodology.  Nicky  Hockly,  2012).  Information  and 
Anyone  who  has  lived  through  the  last  Communication  Technology  (ICT)  developed 
decade of scientific progression comprehends  rampant throughout the past three decennia, 
how  quickly  our  world  is  altering.  And  what  noticeably  switching  various  directions  in 
occurs  external  of  our  education  settings,  in  commercial  and  barter  regions.  This  study 
the actual world, will inevitably influence “what  examines  modern  ideas,  applications,  and 
we  do  inside  our  classrooms,  lecture  halls,  practical information regarding the nature of 
schools,  and  colleges”.  In  each  case,  we  hybrid learning mainly and Computer Assisted 
consider  how  these  new  developments  will  Language  Learning  (CALL)  a  style  of  hybrid 
affect English language teachers and students  learning  explicitly  used  in  English  Language 
in the future”.(Hockly et al., 2018).  Teaching (ELT), specifically. Each of these will 
The  significance  of  materials  in  language  expectantly  upgrade  awareness  to  enforce 
teaching or learning has long been recognized  hybrid learning in ELT to strengthen our learner 
(McGrath, 2013). “Most language courses rely  attainment.  (Pardede,  2012).  The  one  basic 
heavily  on  teaching  materials.  Language  reason for this social uprightness of students is 
teaching today would be impossible to achieve  not badly influenced by the similar scope when 
without  the  extensive  use  of  commercial  English as an international language viewpoint 
materials”  (Richards,  2001).  This  study  is the main element of ELT. (Phillipson, 2001). 
indicates substantial design and the usage of  Embellishment  has  made  education  a 
reliable  materials  in  the  English  as  a  foreign  foreign language essential in the twenty-first 
language classroom, as well as the importance  century. English comes first because it is the 
of these materials for linguistic students. They  language  of  most  professional  and  scientific 
2 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Investigating Gender Perceptions on Technology Use in Pakistan ELT Classrooms        BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 3(4)” 
expansion,  providence,  management,  and  technological  means  in  the  classroom. 
favored  amusement  (Graddol,  2006).  Instructors and teachers are mostly criticized 
Instructing  English  has  been  around  for  a  for  the  imperfection  of  intermingling 
prolonged time, and its importance is growing.  technological  tools  during  their  teaching. 
As  (Graddol,  1997)  predicted  in  his  research  These problems with classroom technological 
two  thousand,  there  will  be  a  billion  English  utilization or the advancing way of instructors’ 
language  learners  and  this  count  reaches  technological  intermixing  are  elaborated  in 
double value or magnitude a decade later. ELT  conditions  of  executive  evolution  inference. 
has all the time been linked to mechanization  (Hixon  &  Buckenmeyer,  2009).  This  research 
(Shinghal,  1997).  Learners  often  found  the  sum-up  with  contemplation  of  the  recent 
procedure  to  be  monotonous  and  situation of the sphere also the prospective for 
uninteresting (Nawaila et al., 2020).  technology  in  assistance  to  integrate 
2.3. Integrating technology in ELT classroom  technology  in  learning  learning-centered 
When  pupils  study  through  technology,  it  environment.  (Pellegrino & Quellmalz, 2014). 
supports  them  to  create  advanced  level  This  study  elaborates  on  the  use  of 
rational  skills.  Finally,  it  is  critical  to  draw  technological  tools,  social  media,  and  print 
learners' attention to the English language, the  media  during  the  learning  of  the  English 
accurate  mixture  of  multimedia  &  teaching  language and teaching of the English language 
procedures (Arifah, 2014). Two diverse views  at  the  level  of  undergraduate.  This  research 
on what method to integrate technology in the  reveals that eager response has become the 
classroom were described. “First, the cognitive  reason for motivation for learning a language. 
approach  allows  students  to  maximize  their  It  is  concluded  that  this  research  plays  an 
language exposure while also developing their  important  role  in  making  planned  language 
knowledge  in  a  meaningful  setting”  These  learning  and  teaching  investigations  from 
technologies  include  manuscript  renovation  unplanned,  it  also  produced  a  syllabus-
software  systems  and  multimedia  imitation  oriented package. (Rao, 2014).  
software.  Students  must  be  able  to  exercise  The efficiency of virtual classrooms is examined 
actual  services  through  sincere  social  from  the  viewpoints  of  35  online  language 
connections  in  this  context.  This  can  be  learning (OLL) teachers in this study. Teachers 
accomplished over reliable projects completed  can engage with students more personally and 
in association with pupils. (Warschauer, 2000).  give  them  feedback  that  is  more  tailored  to 
Scholars  from  various  past  years  have  their  needs.  Students'  language  skills  may 
corroborated  the  positive  influence  of  the  advance more quickly and effectively as a result 
utilization of information and communication  of this. In conclusion, this study analyzed that 
technology  in  teaching.  An  exploration  of  the  participants  in  this  research  were  very 
similar  studies  with  the  sole  objective  of  positive  about  the  efficiency  of  online 
computing  the  recent  study  swing  on  the  classrooms  for  OLL.  They  believe  that  online 
endowment  of  ingenious  technology  classrooms propose a variety of benefits over 
concerning  English  language  learning  and  physical  classrooms  and  these  online 
instructing.  For  this  research  50  published  classrooms  proved  to  be  beneficial  tools  for 
articles  from  2000-  2018  were  used.  These  learning  language  (Manegre  &  Sabiri,  2022; 
articles  were  taken  from  EBSCO  and  Science  Sabiri & Shah, 2023). Technology has been a big 
Direct. SPSS was used as a data analysis tool.  source  of  advancement  in  recent  eras  it  has 
(Nawaila, 2020).  changed  our  societal  lifestyle  and  our 
As  educational  institutions’  technology  assumptions in the developing world. This is the 
groundwork increases, one ordinary source of  need of the hour every learner and individual 
study  is  the  underuse  of  laptops  and  other  must be aware of the usage of technology and 
3 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| The efficiency of virtual classrooms is examined   |
|:---------------------------------------------------|
| from the viewpoints of 35 online language          |
| learning (OLL) teachers in this study. Teachers    |
| can engage with students more personally and       |
| give them feedback that is more tailored to        |
| their needs. Students' language skills may         |
| advance more quickly and effectively as a result   |
| of this. In conclusion, this study analyzed that   |
| the participants in this research were very        |
| positive about the efficiency of online            |
| classrooms for OLL. They believe that online       |
| classrooms propose a variety of benefits over      |
| physical classrooms and these online               |
| classrooms proved to be beneficial tools for       |
| learning language (Manegre & Sabiri, 2022;         |
| Sabiri & Shah, 2023). Technology has been a big    |
| source of advancement in recent eras it has        |
| changed our societal lifestyle and our             |
| assumptions in the developing world. This is the   |
| need of the hour every learner and individual      |
| must be aware of the usage of technology and       |

Investigating Gender Perceptions on Technology Use in Pakistan ELT Classrooms        BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 3(4)” 
technology-based  programming.  (Ibrahim,  characteristics,  which  are  determined  by  the 
2010).  environment, and which are stable throughout 
Gender in Educational Context:  one's lifetime.  
According to Ekstrand (1980), there are few  Furthermore,  in  the  Dominance  model, 
studies  on  gender  alterations  in  Language  2  women  are  perceived  to  perform  their 
learning, and there is no information on gender  ‘woman-ness’  in  an  ethnomethodological 
and  overseas  language  attainment.  frame  as  they  continually  negotiate  their 
Nonetheless, Ekstrand opposes himself later by  position of relative powerlessness vis a vis man 
claiming  "consistent  superiority  of  girls  in  all  (Cameron, 1995). Education plays a role as the 
variables".  Ekstrand  concludes  that  similar  requisite  instrument  in  bringing  off  gender 
research  "does  not  support  any  safe  sovereignty and approval of females or males 
conclusions  about  gender  differences  in  L2  inscribe  gender  interstice  in  dissemination 
learning (Ekstrand, 1980).  chance and expedient. Gender distinctions are 
According  to  Baumeister  (1988),  sex  surprisingly,  an  elemental  certainty  of 
difference studies might not be a prolific study  sociolinguistic  existence  and  it  is  not 
topic because gender variations can be used to  astonishing that are contemplated in language 
justify female discernment and subjugation. He  learning.  Furthermore,  there  are  definite 
theorizes that, given the feminist opinion that  aspects  of  language  learning  which  are 
discrimination  saturates  civilization,  sex  pertinent for males and other aspects may be 
differences research should be discontinued or,  utilized  by  females.  In  other  studies,  these 
at  the  very  least,  limited.  Furthermore,  discriminations rely not just on the addresser 
research into language and gender can lead to  of  gender  but  on  the  sex  of  the  addressee 
pedagogy  that  benefits  both  genders”  (Ansary and Babaii, 2003). 
(Baumeister, 1988).  2.5. Research Gap 
The  discoveries  are  encouraging  to  throw  Technology  integration  in  the  English 
back  a  balanced  presentation  of  men  and  language Classroom teaching is an important 
women  this  research  also  provides  a  ray  of  and pressing issue in today's world. To avoid 
expectation  for  the  next  generation  in  ELT  lawlessness  and  inconvenience  when  using 
textbooks.  (Studies  et  al.,  2017).  In  the  last  technology in ELT, all advanced countries have 
three decades, suffragists and professors have  developed  new  policies.  Pakistan  is  a 
studied  the  multiplex  interactivity  of  gender  developing country that recognizes the value 
with  multiple  matters  for  example  authority,  of technology in the educational system. Work 
political  authority,  occupation,  and  on  ELT  continues  in  Pakistan.  This  research 
identification  (Visser,  2002).  Cameron  (1995)  contributes  to  the  consideration  of  gender 
states, "A crude historical-typological account  standpoints on the incorporation of technology 
of  feminist  linguistic  approaches  since  1973  in (ELT). The current study aimed to explore the 
would  probably  distinguish  between  three  perception of males and females regarding the 
models  of  language  and  gender,  the  deficit  practice  of  technology  in  English  Language 
model, the cultural difference model, and the  Teaching classrooms and to explore which class 
dominance  model.  This  interpretation  of gender mostly prefers using technology in 
accorded  well  with  one  of  the  assumptions  ELT classrooms. The study tried to fill the gap in 
made by early gender scholars such as Lakoff  the literature regarding the use of technology 
(1975),  who  saw  women’s  language  as  the  in  education  concerning  males  and  females 
“language  of  powerlessness,”  a  reflection  of  and  tried  to  contribute  to  this  field  by 
their  subordinate  place  about  men.  Block  recruiting a sample from a public university in 
(2002)  states  that  the  view  of  gender  is  Okara. This researcher tried to understand the 
essentialized in that it is about having certain  usage of technology concerning genders  and 
4 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| technology-based programming. (Ibrahim,   |
|:------------------------------------------|
| 2010).                                    |

Investigating Gender Perceptions on Technology Use in Pakistan ELT Classrooms        BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 3(4)” 
the  reason  for  difference  if  any  was  found  Two propositions were supposed by Langdon 
among the preferences of the genders.  Winner for this theory 
Methodology  1.  The technology of a specified society is a 
Theoretical Framework  foundational  inspirer  of  different  ways 
The theory  of “technological determinism”  through which a society subsists.  
forged by Thorstein Veblen in the 1920s (1857- 2.  Variations in technology are the central and 
1929) was adopted for this research as it circles  most salient source that led to substitutes in 
the postulation that in every designated society  society.  
technology  characterizes  its  description.  Figure 2. Technology in environment 
Technology is perceived as the driving force of 
traditions  in  a  community  and  regulates  its  formation
s
history.  In  this  research  second  hypothesis 
proposed by Langdon Winner for this theory  individual
context
s
was  explored  which  states  “Changes  in  human 
technology  are  the  primary  and  most 
input
important source that leads to change in the 
society”  (Adler  et  al.,  n.d.).  This  research  experienc corporate 
e culture
examines whether it is true in Pakistani settings 
and  what  gender  will  perceive  about  this  actions
hypothesis now.  
 
Figure 1. Theoretical framework 
Data collection tools population and sample 
size 
This  research  is  quantitative  research 
regulated  by  utilizing  quantitative  research 
methods.  In  quantitative  research,  numerical 
data are gathered and analyzed to characterize, 
explain,  forecast,  or  control  relevant 
occurrences  (Mills  & Gay,  2019).  The  sample 
size  N=90  comprised  English  Language 
 
The theory of technological determinism is a  students from various classes at the University 
theory  of  degeneracy.  The  objective  of  this  of Okara’s Department of English Language in 
theory  is  to  produce  a  causative  connection  the  province  of  Punjab  Pakistan.  The 
between  society’s  nature  and  technology.  It  perception of gender towards the utilization of 
struggles to elaborate what and to whom have  technology  in  ELT  classrooms  was  explored 
administering  authority  in  human  through  a  questionnaire  which  initiated  with 
phenomenon.  This  theory  examines  the  certain information and then divided into two 
magnitude to which the thoughts and actions  segments. The first section implores personal 
of human beings are regulated by technological  information about participants in which name, 
factors. Karl Marx accepted that technological  gender,  age,  qualification,  and  semester  are 
advancement led the way for construction in a  explored.  The  second  section  uses  the 
community  and  it  eventually  affected  the  questionnaire  “Gender  perception  towards 
political, economic, and cultural factors of the  technology in ELT” which is further divided into 
community.  He  illustrated  this  point  by  four  segments  (content  knowledge, 
describing  how  with  the  origination  of  the  technological  knowledge,  integration  of 
steam mill a primitive society that relied upon  technology  in  ELT  learning,  and  student 
hand  mills  gradually  evolved  into  a  perception of the use of technology to improve 
manufacturer-investor society.   their language skills). The second section of the 
5 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Investigating Gender Perceptions on Technology Use in Pakistan ELT Classrooms        BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 3(4)” 
questionnaire  comprises  35  items  that  are  a smaller fraction of the population (5 percent 
ranked utilizing a Likert-type scale from 1-5 in  of the total), which they make up. 
which 1 constitutes  ‘strongly  disagree’  and  5   
constitute  ‘strongly  agree’.  An  example  of  Figure 4. Qualification of participants 
questions is: 
Qualification
1.  You think technology saves time and energy 
2.  Do  you  agree  that  technology  spreads 
11, 12%
knowledge and information very fast 
BS
3.  Are  you  happy  or  satisfied  while  using  17, 19%
MA
technology in ELT classrooms 
63, 
4.  Technological devices make us addicted to  Mphil 69%
technology 
The  data  gathered  throughout  the  survey   
 
questionnaire was examined using quantitative 
Table 1. Cronbach's Alpha for questionnaire 
research methods e.g., descriptive statistics t-
Cronbach's  Cronbach's  N  of 
test and ANOVA the outcomes were accessible 
Alpha  Alpha Based on  Items 
by  using  tables,  charts,  and  graphs.  The 
questionnaire  was  adapted  from  (Education,  Standardized 
2018; Technologies, n.d.; Ammade et al., 2018;  Items 
Akah  et  al.,  2022;  Katemba,  2019;  Studies, 
.920  .926  31 
2018a; Studies, 2018b).  
 
 
To understand participant attitudes toward 
Results and Discussion 
the use of technology in ELT, the researcher 
4.1.1. Demographic Information
 
computed the mean and standard deviation of 
The graph shows the gender distribution of 
the  responses  provided  by  participants.  The 
the  45  participants  from  each  gender,  who 
average  response  from  female  participants 
made up an equal number of male and female 
ranged from 3.73 to 4.62, indicating that they 
students in the research study. 
generally  agreed  with  the  questionnaire's 
 
questions about the use of technology in ELT. 
Figure 3. Gender representation 
The higher mean score of 4.62 indicates that 
Gender
there was strong support for using technology 
in  ELT  among  the  female  participants.  The 
mean  score  for  male  responses,  however, 
Male
ranged  from  3.6  to  4.44.  The  lower  mean 
45 45
Female scores  compared  to  the  female  responses 
indicate that male participants showed usually 
 
lesser  agreement,  even  if  this  range  also 
 
demonstrates  a  generally  positive  attitude 
The  distribution  of  participant  ages  in  the 
toward technology in ELT. The researcher also 
research study is shown on the graph. Twenty-
observed that the standard deviation of female 
year-old or older participants make up roughly 
responses ranged from 0.49 to 1.31 and male 
10 to 11% of the whole group. The majority, 
responses ranged from 0.62 to 1.27. the data 
between 47 and 52%, are between the ages of 
depicted that most of the participants agreed 
21 and 24. Participants between the ages of 25 
and appreciated the use of technology in ELT. 
and 28 make up a sizeable majority, between 
 
29 and 32%. People over the age of 28 make up 
 
Table 2. Std, Mean of males and females 
6 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Investigating Gender Perceptions on Technology Use in Pakistan ELT Classrooms        BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 3(4)” 
   
   
Female  Male 
 
N  Mean  Std.  Mean  Std. 
Deviation 
Deviation 
I have sufficient knowledge of English language learning technologies.  45  4.4889  0.50553  4.2667  0.8634 
I have various ways and strategies for developing my understanding  45  4.4  0.61791  4.3556  0.60886 
of English. 
I know the technologies that I can use for learning English.  45  4.6  0.49543  4.4444  0.65905 
I keep up with important new technologies for language learning.  45  4.3333  0.70711  4.1333  0.91949 
I have had sufficient opportunities to work with different technologies  45  4.5333  0.72614  3.8444  0.92823 
in ELT classrooms. 
I know about a lot of different technologies that can be implemented  45  4.2889  0.78689  3.9556  1.06506 
in ELT classrooms. 
.  Integration  of  technology  stimulates  students'  motivation,  45  4.6222  0.71633  3.9111  0.97286 
concentration & learning. 
I like the strategies that appropriately combine English, technologies,  45  4.4444  0.62361  4.1778  0.83364 
and teaching approaches. 
I can encourage online interactivity among students and teachers  45  4.4  0.71985  4.1333  0.84208 
while English Language Learning. 
Using technology in ELT class is very beneficial.  45  4.4889  0.62603  4.1111  0.93474 
Technological devices make us addicted to technological machines  45  4.3333  0.60302  3.9778  0.83907 
Old-fashioned ways (using pen and paper, course books, blackboards,  45  3.9556  1.31349  3.6  1.05313 
etc.) are more useful than technology in classes. 
I appreciate the usage of technology in classes for English language  45  4.6  0.49543  4.1556  0.9524 
learning. 
I think critically about the use of technology to enhance my language  45  4.2889  0.78689  4.0444  1.06506 
learning 
Integration of technology facilitates the students in learning English  45  4.3556  0.80214  4.2667  0.8634 
Lack of technological equipment affects students' language learning  45  4.2889  0.86923  4.0222  0.9412 
I feel satisfied while using technology in the ELT classroom  45  4.4  0.71985  3.9333  0.93905 
Teachers' and students' experience of technology is beneficial for ELT  45  4.5556  0.62361  4.0889  0.73306 
I 4 that technology can spread knowledge and information very fast  45  4.4222  0.81153  4.1778  0.91176 
Technological  tools  can  be  used  as  curriculum  materials  at  45  4.3111  0.70137  4.0667  0.91453 
Schools/Colleges 
Technological tools can replace teachers in teaching English  45  4.2222  1.06363  3.8667  1.27208 
I think technology use does not have noteworthy value for human  45  3.7333  1.30384  3.8444  1.16688 
societies in general 
I think technology saves energy and time  45  4.5556  0.62361  4.3556  0.64511 
I think the use of Zoom and WhatsApp can help the students eliminate  45  4.4222  0.81153  3.9111  1.12457 
hesitation/ lack of confidence in practicing English 
I think the use of Zoom and WhatsApp is strategic for learning English,  45  4.2667  0.93905  4.0222  1.03328 
especially for discussion and question-answer 
I think students must use technology in all subject matters  45  4.5556  0.72474  4.2444  0.98062 
The use of technological tools makes learning more entertaining than  45  4.4444  0.72474  4.1333  0.86865 
traditional ways of teaching 
The use of technological tools has improved my reading skills  45  4.3778  0.88649  4.4222  0.62118 
The use of technological tools improves my listening skills  45  4.3333  0.79772  4.3111  0.73306 
The use of technological tools improves my speaking skills  45  4.3556  0.88306  4.2444  0.88306 
The use of technological tools improves my writing skills  45  4.1333  0.96766  4.2  0.94388 
7 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Investigating Gender Perceptions on Technology Use in Pakistan ELT Classrooms        BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 3(4)” 
The  graph  shows  the  4.104  participants,  4.2. Discussion  
accounting for 48% of the total identified as  Thorstein Veblen's (1857–1929) theory of 
males. In contrast, 4.371 participants, making  "technological determinism," which revolves 
up  52%  of  the  total  identified  as  females.  around  the  hypothesis  that  technology 
These  figures  insights  into  the  disparities  in  characterizes  every  defined  society's 
gender perspectives on the use of technology  description,  was  utilized  for  this  study. 
in ELT.    Technology is seen as the factor that controls 
Figure 5. Comparison of means  a community's history and drives its customs. 
In  this  study,  the  second  Langdon  Winner 
Comparison of Means
supposition for this theory—that "Changes in 
technology  are  the  principal  and  most 
Female
important cause that leads to change in the 
4.104, 
4.371, 
Male
society"—was investigated. (Adler et al., n.d.). 
48%
52%
The  only  claim  made  by  technological 
determinism  is  that  technology  and  its 
 
The responses of females have a mean of  applications have a substantial impact on how 
4.371, with 3.733 being the lowest value and  we  survive.  The  proposal  is  prominently 
4.622 being the highest. The variance of .035  mentioned  in  popular  interest  and  political 
suggests that there is not much variation and  discourse, such as the claim that the internet 
that the results are characteristically near to  and  social  media  have  changed  society  and 
the mean.  providence.  This  study  investigates  if  it  is 
Table 3. Females mean comparison  accurate  in  the  Pakistani  context  and  how 
  Mea Min  Ma Rang Max  V N   gender will perceive this claim going forward. 
n  x  e  /  ar  The  findings  of  this  research  elucidate  that 
Min 
technology  has  profoundly  shaped  our 
Item  4.371  3.73 4.62 .889  1.238  .0 3
societal fabric, exerting distinct permutations 
3  2  35  1 
Mea
upon  our  collective  ethos  and  cognitive 
n 
Item  .636  .245  1.72 1.480  7.029  .1 3 paradigms.  
5  24  1 
Var  4.2.1. Research Question 1  
Because the researcher's primary goal was 
Male responses range from a minimum of 
to acquire data regarding the integration of 
3.600 to a maximum of 4.444, with an average 
technology  in  ELT,  the  questionnaire  was 
value of 4.104. Due to the low variance of.037, 
created  taking  technological  knowledge  and 
it can be concluded that the scores for these 
ELT  integration  into  consideration 
items are impartially near to the mean. 
(Technologies, n.d.; Studies, 2018; Education, 
Table 4. Males mean comparison 
2018; Katemba, 2019). The overall Cronbach's 
  M Mini Maxi Ra Maxi Vari N 
Alpha reliability of the questionnaire used in 
ea mum  mum  ng mum  ance  of 
this study was 920, which was deemed to be 
n  e  /  Ite
Mini ms  an ideal coefficient one, a high level of internal 
mum 
consistency, or a high degree of correlation 
Item  4.1 3.60 4.444  .84 1.235  .037  31 
between the scale items (Alshammari et al., 
Mea 04  0  4 
ns  2017).  The  maximum  mean  from  female 
Item  .84 .371  1.618  1.2 4.365  .081  31 
responses  was  4.6  and  4.4  from  male 
Varia 6  47 
responses  of  knowledge  about  the  English 
nces 
language and technological integration in ELT. 
The  variation  in  these  values  claims  that 
59 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Investigating Gender Perceptions on Technology Use in Pakistan ELT Classrooms        BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 3(4)” 
females have more knowledge about English  Sabiri  &  Shah,  2023).  The  fourth  and  final 
language  learning  and  technological  theme of the questionnaire was focused on 
integration in ELT. (Garcia-holgado et al., 2018;  students'  perceptions  of  how  technology  is 
Phillipson, 2001)  used to help learners enhance their language 
To  give  learners  enough  opportunities  to  skills  in  reading,  writing,  speaking,  and 
work  with  various  technologies  in  ELT  listening. The female responses have a mean 
classrooms  and  to  keep  up  with  important  value  of  4.3  and  males  have  4.4,  so  males 
new technologies for language learning, the  support  this  statement  more  strongly  as 
second main theme, technological knowledge,  compared to females.  
was  further  divided  into  three  subthemes.  4.2.2. Research Question 2  
Many  different  technologies  can  be  used  in  According  to  the  results  of  the  statistical 
ELT classrooms. (Pardede, 2012; Aykut Arslan,  analysis of the questionnaire, it can be said 
2008;  Dudeney  &  Hockly,  2012).  Male  that when compared to males, females have a 
responses had a maximum mean value of 4.1  stronger  propensity  to  favor  the  use  of 
and female responses had a maximum mean  technology in ELT classrooms. Examples and 
value of 4.5. This variation in the mean values  discussion  are  as  follows.  Technology  has 
demonstrates  that  males  have  fewer  been useful in ELT, as students can promote 
opportunities to use various technologies in  online  interaction  between  themselves  and 
ELT  courses  and  that  they  are  less  their  teachers  while  studying  the  English 
knowledgeable  about  such  technology.  language. (Hockly et al., 2018; Salehi & Salehi, 
Students benefit from tactics that effectively  2011;  Education,  2018).  Regarding  this 
blend  English  technologies  and  instructional  statement on the Cronbach Alpha mean scale, 
philosophies  because  they  are  motivated,  the data showed that males scored an average 
focused, and learn more. (Iqbal & Rafi, 2018;  of  4.1  while  females  displayed  an  average 
Cuban,  2001;  Murat  Hismanoglu,  2011).  In  rating  of  4.4.  These  numbers  show  that 
comparison to men, this value demonstrates  females were more likely to agree than males 
that women are more focused and appreciate  believe that technology has a lot of potential 
learning strategies that integrate technologies  for  (ELT).  Additionally,  these  findings  imply 
and instructional methods.  that  integrating  technology  into  ELT  classes 
The  students  believe  that  integrating  has  the  potential  to  promote  a  lively  and 
technology makes it easier for them to learn  passionate  mode  of  interaction  between 
English, and they also believe that a lack of  teachers and students, improving the learning 
technical resources hinders their ability to do  process as a whole. 
so. (Nawaila, 2020). Male and female mean  The use of technology in ELT classrooms by 
values of 4.3 and 4.2, respectively, show that  teachers  and  students  was  a  positive 
responses  from  both  sexes  are  about  experience  for  both  learners  and  teachers. 
comparable,  with  females  placing  greater  (Hixon  & Buckenmeyer, 2009  ;  Pellegrino  & 
emphasis  than  males.  Females  and  males'  Quellmalz,  2014).  Technology  integration  in 
mean values of 4.3 and 4.2, respectively, show  (ELT)  classrooms  has  proven  to  be  a 
that  responses  from  both  sexes  are  about  collaborative  situation  for  teachers  and 
comparable,  with  females  placing  greater  students. This claim is supported by the fact 
emphasis than males. The usage of WhatsApp  that, on a mean scale, male respondents gave 
and  Zoom  is  important  for  learning  English,  an  average  rating  of  4.0,  while  female 
particularly for debate, and using technology  respondents  gave  an  average  rating  of  4.5. 
to teach makes learning more enjoyable than  The obvious difference between these mean 
traditional methods (Manegre & Sabiri, 2022;  ratings  indicates  that,  in  comparison  to  the 
60 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Investigating Gender Perceptions on Technology Use in Pakistan ELT Classrooms        BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 3(4)” 
male  respondents,  female  respondents  felt  receptive  to  incorporating  technology 
more content when using technology as a tool  innovations  within  the  context  of  ELT.  This 
to  facilitate  language  learning.  In  addition,  increased support can be attributed to several 
women  indicated  a  stronger  belief  in  the  things,  including  a  deeper  understanding  of 
effectiveness  of  technology  in  facilitating  the  transformative  effects  that  digital  tools 
language learning.  have  on  pedagogical  practices,  a  greater 
Students  benefit  from  tactics  that  appreciation  for  the  potential  benefits  of 
effectively  blend  English  technologies  and  technology  in  language  acquisition,  and 
instructional  philosophies  because  they  are  increased recognition of the effectiveness of 
motivated, focused, and learn more. (Cuban,  technology-mediated learning environments. 
2001;  Murat  Hismanoglu,  2011).  The  This  disparity  in  opinions  between  the 
examination of the data showed that whereas  genders suggests that initiatives to adopt and 
female  participants  showed  a  higher  mean  yield  from  technology  advancements  in  ELT 
score of 4.6, male participants showed a mean  may  succeed  better  among  the  female 
score  of  4.1.  This  disparity  suggests  that  population. 
females  have  a  higher  propensity  for  focus  Conclusion 
and  a  higher  appreciation  for  pedagogical  In  conclusion,  this  study  indicates  that 
strategies  that  combine  technological  females are more likely than males to favour 
innovations with instructional methodologies.  the use of technology in ELT classes and have 
In  other  words,  females  typically  exhibit  more  knowledge  of  English  language 
increased  focus  and  a  stronger  aptitude for  acquisition  and  technological  integration  in 
learning  tactics  that  utilize  pioneering  ELT.  The  results  of  TD's  second  hypothesis 
technologies and instructional techniques.  demonstrate how technology has significantly 
Technology  can  convey  information  and  altered  our  collective  ethos  and  cognitive 
knowledge very quickly; thus, students should  frameworks,  reshaping  our  social  fabric. 
use  it  in  all  subject  areas.  (Pellegrino  &  Teachers  may  design  a  more  thorough  and 
Quellmalz,  2014;  Rao,  2014).  Male  useful learning environment that encourages 
participants  produced  a  mean  value  of  4.2,  all  students  to  actively  engage  with 
while  female  participants  showed  a  higher  technology  by  accounting  for  any  potential 
average  of  4.5,  showing  a  noticeable  gender-based  stereotypes  or  hurdles. 
discrepancy  between  the  two  groups,  Females  have  greater  knowledge  of  English 
according to the analysis of the data collected.  language  learning  and  technological 
This discrepancy implies that women have a  integration in ELT due to variations in these 
strong  propensity  for  using  technology  in  a  values. Technology has been beneficial in ELT 
variety of areas. Females exhibit a thorough  since  students  can  enhance  online 
and  progressive  attitude  to  education  by  engagement  between  themselves  and  their 
promoting the use of technology in all subject  teachers while learning English.  
areas.   Furthermore,  females  have  a  larger 
When  compared  to  male  corresponding  tendency to favour the use of technology in 
items,  females  appear  to  have  a  larger  ELT classes than males. The research findings 
propensity  to  support  the  incorporation  of  showed  that  women  are  more  open  to 
technology in the field of ELT, according to a  bringing  technological  advancements  within 
thorough  examination  of  aggregated  mean  the setting of ELT. This increased support can 
scores  and  the  aforementioned  discussion.  be attributed to a variety of factors, including 
Moreover,  the  research  results  imply  that  a better understanding of the transformative 
women  have  a  disposition  that  is  more  effects that digital tools have on pedagogical 
61 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Investigating Gender Perceptions on Technology Use in Pakistan ELT Classrooms        BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 3(4)” 
practices,  a  greater  appreciation  for  the  •  Another drawback was that the study was 
potential benefits of technology in language  limited  to  one  university's  English 
acquisition, and a better understanding of the  department; consequently, a further study 
effectiveness  of  technology-mediated  could be carried out using a mixed strategy 
learning  environments.  This  gender  to  include  students  from  several 
discrepancy  in  opinions  suggests  that  universities to get better results. 
programs  to  accept  and  benefit  from  References 
technological improvements in ELT may fare  Ahmed,  S.  (2017).  Authentic  ELT  Materials  in  the 
Language Classroom : An Overview. 4(2), 181–202. 
better among females. Moreover, this study 
Batool,  R.(2023).  Exploring  Gender  Perceptions  on 
explicates  probable  gender  differences  in 
Using Technology in ELT Classrooms: A Survey-based 
technological  admittance  in  ELT  classrooms. 
Study.  Unpublished  M  Phil  Thesis.  GC  University 
Instructors  and  representatives  can  work 
Faisalabad, Pakistan. 
toward  providing  equivalent  access  to  Cakir,  R.  (2012).  TECHNOLOGY  INTEGRATION  AND 
TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP IN. 11(4), 273–282. 
technology for every learner, irrespective of 
Chvala, L. (2020). Teacher ideologies of English in 21st 
gender, by recognizing and considering these 
century  Norway  and  new  directions  for  locally 
gaps. 
tailored  ELT.  System,  94,  102327. 
5.4. Recommendations 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2020.102327 
•  The  learners  should  use  technology  for  Climate change a major threat to global health — WHO 
- Asia & Pacific. (n.d.). Retrieved June 9, 2022, from 
intelligent and productive purposes rather 
https://www.scidev.net/asia-pacific/news/climate-
than  wasting  their  valuable  time  on 
change-a-major-threat-to-global-health-who/ 
amusement and idleness. 
Education, F. L. (2018).  Journal of Foreign Language 
•  To encourage students to use technology  Education and Technology, 3(1), 2018. 3(1), 0–2. 
in  their  learning,  teachers  should  assign  Ejaz, H., & Naz, S. (2022). The Impact of Task-Based 
Language Teaching on Learning English Grammar at 
project work that is technologically based. 
Secondary School Level. 10(4), 88–99. 
•  Regardless  of  any  obvious  gender 
Ekstrand,  L.  H.  (1980).  Sex  differences  in  second 
prejudices,  students  should  be  given 
language  learning?  Empirical  studies  and  a 
plenty  of  opportunities  for  language  discussion of related findings. Applied Psychology, 
learning  together  with  the  seamless  29(1–2).  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1464-
0597.1980.tb00891.x 
integration of technology. 
Feingold, A. (1988). Cognitive Gender Differences Are 
•  Government  organizations  and 
Disappearing.  American  Psychologist,  43(2). 
educational  policymakers  should  take 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.43.2.95 
steps  to  promote  equal  student  Galloway, N., & Rose, H. (2021). This is a pre-copyedited, 
author-produced  PDF  of  an  article  accepted  for 
technology  adoption,  disregarding  any 
publication in ELT JOURNAL The definitive publisher-
gender-based predispositions. 
authenticated version can be found at Incorporating 
5.5. Limitations  
Global  Englishes  into  the  ELT  classroom. 
The study's first drawback was that it only 
72(February),  3–14. 
included  ELT  students.  The  opinions  of  the  https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccx010 
Grebennikov, L., & Skaines, I. (2009). Gender and higher 
students  were  also  perceived  by  several 
education experience : a case study. 28(1), 71–84. 
departments. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360802444370 
•  The  only  method  used  to  conduct  the 
Guzman,  A.,  &  Nussbaum,  M.  (2009).  Teaching 
current study is quantitative research.  
competencies  for  technology  integration  in  the 
•  Only questionnaires were employed in the  classroom.  453–469. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2729.2009.00322.x 
study as a means of gathering data. 
Hauer, P. T. (2017). Technological determinism and new 
•  Additionally,  data  can  be  gathered  from 
media. 2, 1–4. 
semi-structured student interviews. 
Hismano, M. (2011). The integration of information and 
communication  technology  into  current  ELT 
62 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Investigating Gender Perceptions on Technology Use in Pakistan ELT Classrooms        BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 3(4)” 
coursebooks :  a  critical  analysis.  15,  37–45.  Phillipson, R. (2001). OF AND THE Ideology and the ELT 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2011.03.048  practitioner. 
Hixon,  E.,  &  Buckenmeyer,  J.  (2009).  Revisiting  Pu, H. (2020). Implementing online ELT in the time of 
Technology Integration in Schools : Implications for  crisis :  ordeal  or  opportunity ?  74(July),  345–348. 
Professional  Development  Revisiting  Technology  https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccaa030 
Integration in Schools : Implications for Professional  Rao, B. M. (2014). Use of media as an instructional tool 
Development.  0569.  in  English  Language  Teaching  (  ELT  )  at 
https://doi.org/10.1080/07380560902906070  undergraduate  level.  5(6),  141–143. 
Hockly, N., Consultants-e, T., & Dudeney, G. (2018a).  https://doi.org/10.5897/IJEL2014.0580 
Current and Future Digital Trends in ELT Current and  Review,  A.  E.  (2014).  The  challenge  of  effective 
Future  Digital  Trends  in  ELT.  October.  technology integration into teaching and learning. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0033688218777318  6627. 
Ibrahim,  A.  I.  (2010).  Information  &  Communication  https://doi.org/10.1080/18146627.2013.853559 
Technologies  in  ELT.  1(3),  211–214.  Rochma, A. F., & Triastuti, A. (2020). Rhetorical styles of 
https://doi.org/10.4304/jltr.1.3.211-214  Introduction  in  English  language  teaching  (  ELT  ) 
Info,  A.  (2022).  Technology  integration  in  teaching  research articles. 10(2), 304–314. 
English as a foreign language : A content analysis  Sabiri,  M.  S.,  &  Shah,  M.  I.  (2023).  Vocabulary  and 
study.  Mobile  Assisted  Language  Learning  (MALL):  A 
Iqbal, M., & Rafi, M. S. (2018). A Comparative Study of  Survey on ESL Undergraduate Learners of Punjab. 
English Language Teaching Practices at the Access  Research Journal of Social Sciences and Economics 
Program and Public Schools. 40(3), 231–249.  Review, 4(2), 187–200. 
Katemba,  C.  V.  (2019).  Teachers  ’  Perceptions  in  Sansinadi, I. T., & Yogyakarta, A. D. (2020). TEACHER S 
Implementing Technologies in Language Teaching  PERSPECTIVES TOWARD GOOGLE CLASSROOM AS A 
and Learning. katemba, 38–52.  TOOL  FOR  IMPROVING  ELT  CLASSROOM 
Koerner, E. F. K. (1992). The Sapir-Whorf Hypothesis: A  INTERACTION. 7(2), 370–381. 
Preliminary  History  and  a  Bibliographical  Essay.  Shen, C. (2003). Using English Songs : an Enjoyable and 
Journal  of  Linguistic  Anthropology,  2(2).  Effective Approach to ELT. 2(1), 88–94. 
https://doi.org/10.1525/jlin.1992.2.2.173  Singh, R. (2019). Students ’ perspectives on technology 
Language,  E.,  &  Program,  T.  (2014).  USE  OF  ICT  integration in ELT. 24(1). 
TECHNOLOGIES  AND  FACTORS  AFFECTING  PRE- Studies,  L.  (2018a).  JOURNAL  OF  LANGUAGE  AND 
SERVICE  ELT  TEACHERS  ’  PERCEIVED  ICT  SELF- LINGUISTIC STUDIES An investigation of prospective 
EFFICACY. 13(2).  ELT  teachers  ’  attitudes  towards  using  computer 
Lubis, N., Lubis, A., & Ashadi, R. I. (2018). Integrating  technologies  in  foreign  language  teaching.  14(1), 
Teaching  Models  to  Enhance  Efl  Students  ’  328–341. 
Interpersonal  Communication  Skill  and  Creativity.  Studies, L., Demir, Y., & Yavuz, M. (2017). JOURNAL OF 
2012.  LANGUAGE  AND  LINGUISTIC  STUDIES  Do  ELT 
Manegre,  M.,  Sabiri,  K.  A.  (2020).  Online  language  coursebooks still suffer from gender inequalities ? A 
learning  using  virtual  classrooms :  an  analysis  of  case study from Turkey. 13(1), 103–122. 
teacher perceptions. Computer Assisted Language  Tin, T. B. (2013). Towards creativity in ELT : the need to 
Learning,  0(0),  1–16.  say  something  new.  67(October),  385–397. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2020.1770290  https://doi.org/10.1093/elt/cct022 
Mccaughan, P. M. (2009). An Historical Look at Gender  Tosuncuoglu, I. (2018). Importance of Assessment in ELT. 6(9), 
in the ESL Classroom. 80–84.  163–167. https://doi.org/10.11114/jets.v6i9.3443 
Training, T., Surabaya, U. M., Java, E., Malang, U. N., & Java, E. 
Nawaila,  M.  B.  (2020).  Technology  and  English 
(2020). TEACHERS ’ ICT LITERACY AND ICT INTEGRATION 
Language  Teaching  and  Learning :  A  Content 
IN ELT. July, 0–3. 
Analysis. 5(1), 16–23. 
Wongsothorn, A., Hiranburana, K., & Chinnawongs, S. (2006). 
Negi, J. S. (2009). The Role of Teachers ’ Non-verbal 
English  Language  Teaching  in  Thailand  Today  English 
Communication in ELT Classroom. 1(1), 101–110. 
Language  Teaching  in  Thailand  Today.  8791(2002). 
Nuraeni, C., Bina, U., Informatika, S., & Barat, J. (2019). 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0218879020220210 
Using Total Physical Response ( TPR ) Method on  Zhang, X. (n.d.). Re-conceptualizing Techno-Linguistics : Using 
Young  Learners  English  Language  Teaching.  3(1),  Technology for English Language Teaching ? Technology-
26–34. https://doi.org/10.31002/metathesis.  Based English Language Teaching. 162–166. 
Zheng,  S.  (2012).  Studies  and  Suggestions  on  English 
 Pellegrino, J. W., & Quellmalz, E. S. (2014). Perspectives 
Vocabulary  Teaching  and  Learning.  5(5),  129–137. 
on the Integration of Technology and Assessment. 
https://doi.org/10.5539/elt.v5n5p129 
1523. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15391523.2010.10782565 
63 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  