A  review  of  methods  to  trace  material  flows  into  final  products  in 
1 
dynamic material flow analysis - from industry shipments in physical 
2 
units to monetary input-output tables (part I) 
3 
4  Jan Streeck1,*, Stefan Pauliuk2, Hanspeter Wieland3, Dominik Wiedenhofer1  
5  1 University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences, Vienna, Department for Economics and Social Sciences, Institute of Social 
6  Ecology, Schottenfeldgasse 29, 1070 Vienna, Austria 
7  2  Industrial Ecology Freiburg, Albert-Ludwigs University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany 
8  3 Vienna University of Economics and Business, Institute for Ecological Economics, Vienna, Austria 
9  *Corresponding author: jan.streeck@boku.ac.at  
10  Article type: ‘Methods Article’ 
11  Keywords: industrial ecology, circular economy, environmental accounting, input-output analysis (IOA) economy-wide 
12  material flow analysis (EW-MFA), societal metabolism  
13   
Abstract 
14 
15  Dynamic Material Flow Analysis (dMFA) is widely used to model stock-flow dynamics. To appropriately represent 
16  material  lifetimes, recycling  potentials, and service provision, dMFA requires  data  about the allocation of 
17  economy-wide material consumption to different end-use products or sectors, i.e., the different product stocks, 
18  in which material consumption accumulates. Previous estimates of this allocation only cover few years, countries, 
19  and product groups. Recently, several new methods for estimating end-use product allocation in dMFA were 
20  proposed, which so far lack systematic comparison.  
21  We review and systematize five methods for tracing material consumption into end-use products in inflow-
22  driven dMFA and discuss their strengths and limitations. Widely used data on industry shipments in physical 
23  units have low spatio-temporal coverage, which limits their applicability across countries and years. Monetary 
24  input-output tables (MIOTs) are widely available and their economy-wide coverage makes them a valuable 
25  source to approximate material end-uses. We find four distinct MIOT-based methods: consumption-based, 
26  waste-input-output MFA (WIO-MFA), Ghosh absorbing Markov chain, and Partial Ghosh. We show that when 
27  applied to a given MIOT, the methods’ underlying input-output models yield the same results, with exception of 
28  the Partial Ghosh method, which involves simplifications. For practical applications, the MIOT system boundary 
29  must be aligned to those of dMFA, which involves the removal of service flows, sector (dis)aggregation, and re-
30  defining specific intermediate outputs as final demand. Theoretically, WIO-MFA, applied to a modified MIOT, 
31  produces the most accurate results as it excludes massless and waste transactions. In part II of this work, we 
32  compare methods empirically and suggest improvements for aligning MIOT-dMFA system boundaries. 
1 
 

1.  Introduction 
1 
2  Dynamic Material Flow Analysis (dMFA) is increasingly used for the mass-balanced modelling of socio-
3  economic material stocks and flows. It allows us to study the biophysical basis of society in great detail, 
4  including economy-wide, long-term, high process and product resolution stock-flow dynamics (Haberl 
5  et al., 2019; Lanau et al., 2019; E. Müller et al., 2014). Such information offers important insights for 
6  sustainability science and high-level political goals like the Sustainable Development Goals or the Paris 
7  Climate Agreement (Clark & Harley, 2020; Haberl et al., 2019; Pauliuk & Hertwich, 2015). 
8  Research using dMFA can be divided into stock-driven (‘bottom-up’) and inflow-driven (‘top-down’) 
9  applications, depending on which exogenous data are used to endogenously derive either stocks or 
10  flows (Lanau et al., 2019; E. Müller et al., 2014; Wiedenhofer et al., 2019). We herein focus on inflow-
11  driven ‘top-down’ dMFA, which draws on widely available data for material or product consumption, 
12  production and trade, and models the accumulation of stocks from those physical flows into use (Cao, 
13  Shen, Løvik, et al., 2017; Liu & Müller, 2013; Pauliuk et al., 2013; Wiedenhofer et al., 2019). A major 
14  drawback of the available material flow data is, that they either refer to specific products or report 
15  total economy-wide material consumption without distinguishing any products or end-uses (W.-Q. 
16  Chen & Graedel, 2015; Krausmann, Schandl, et al., 2017; Lanau et al., 2019). Improving the resolution 
17  and coverage of end-use products in inflow-driven dMFA is therefore an important research frontier. 
18  Material end-use products refer to the type of product stocks as which materials accumulate and 
19  which are ultimately used to provide functions and services (e.g. living space provided by buildings, 
20  mobility enabled by infrastructure and bicycles, cars, trams, etc.; L. Carmona et al., 2017; Haberl et al., 
21  2017; Kalt et al., 2019; Tanikawa et al., 2021). Improved end-use product resolution would enable 
22  progress on, for example: more detailed and robust material stock and end-of-life outflow estimates 
23  by product through more accurate lifetime assumptions (W.-Q. Chen & Graedel, 2015; Miatto et al., 
24  2017);  better  comparison  with  independently  derived  ‘bottom-up’  end-use  product  estimates; 
25  expanded  systems  modelling,  addressing  product-level  operational  energy  use,  emissions,  or 
26  circularity; and linkage of stocks and flows with material and energy services, practices and ultimately 
27  their contributions to human well-being (Haberl et al., 2021).  
28  To model the end-use products that materials accumulate in, inflow-driven dMFA studies draw on 
29  various data sources and methodological options (Figure 1). We focus on the first option in Figure 1, 
30  which  starts  with  widely  available  economy-wide  data  on  production,  trade  and  apparent 
31  consumption  for  multiple  materials.  Because  these  data  are  compiled  in  an  aggregate  manner, 
32  material end-uses need to be added exogenously, using data on ‘end-use shares’ as proxy. Ideally, 
33  information on ‘end-use shares’ should be on the product rather than sectoral level, e.g. refer to a 
2 
 

1  residential building instead of the broader construction sector (Chen and Graedel (2015) and W.-Q. 
2  Chen (2017)). When available, sector and product-specific data (Figure 1, options 2/3) directly provide 
3  end-use information (reviewed in W.-Q. Chen and Graedel (2015)), but these are often scarce or very 
4  labor intensive to compile, rendering economy-wide and long-term coverage across many materials, 
5  end-uses and countries hardly achievable.1   
6   
7   
8  Figure 1: Approaches to utilizing different data sources for inflow-driven dynamic Material Flow Analysis to differentiate 
9  material stocks by end-uses at product or sector-level. Material end-uses are defined as the ‘products’ in which materials 
10  accumulate, e.g. the steel, aluminum or plastics, accumulated in a bicycle, car, building or infrastructure. Data availability 
11  and research scope determine which approach is feasible and useful (W.-Q. Chen & Graedel, 2015; Wiedenhofer et al., 2019). 
12  Data  sources  (0),  (1)  and  (3)  are  shown  with  two  data  entry  points  (grey  lines)  ,  as  they  can  be  utilized  either  as 
13  material/product production, or at the stage of apparent consumption after trade. This paper focuses on option (1): total 
14  material production/consumption multiplied by end-use shares D to distinguish economy-wide material use to end-use 
15  products or sectors. 
16   
17  To derive ‘end-use shares’ for economy-wide material flows, several methods and data sources have 
18  been used. So far, these methods have not been systematically compared and differing terminology, 
19  mathematical notations, and study scopes make it hard to assess their strengths and weaknesses. 
20  Additionally, inflow-driven dMFA studies are either increasingly re-using published end-use shares 
21  from previous work (e.g. Godoy León et al., 2020; Jarrín Jácome et al., 2021; Klose & Pauliuk, 2021; 
22  Wieland et al., 2021), or could gain enhanced insights via the introduction of end-uses to economy-
23  wide dMFA (Streeck et al., 2020; Wiedenhofer et al., 2019). Therefore, it becomes important to 
24  comparatively assess end-use  estimation methods  to  inform  future work  towards  building  more 
25  reliable stock-flow databases across multiple materials, regions and years. Here, we pose the following 
26  research questions: 
 
1 Option 2 are sector-level physical flow data (Figure 1, identifier 2), for which end-use is identified by the destination of the destined manufacturing sector or 
market (e.g. tons crude steel shipped to automotive). Later, we call these ‘industry shipments’ as data source to inform end-use shares. Option 3 are product-
level flow data (Figure 1, identifier 3) which directly report the sale of specific products in either physical (e.g. number of cars sold) or monetary units (e.g. value 
of cars sold) for which material use is inferred via material intensities. 
3 
 

1  •  RQ1: Which data sources and methods are used to determine the share of different end-use 
2  products in final material consumption (‘end-use shares’) for inflow-driven dynamic Material Flow 
3  Analysis?  
4  •  RQ2: What are the rationales and methodological requirements for each method? What are their 
5  similarities, differences, strengths and weaknesses regarding consistent system boundaries, end-
6  use resolution, as well as application to many materials, countries and years? 
7  We review and compare five distinct methods for deriving material end-use shares applicable to 
8  economy-wide material flows. Data sources include industry shipment data in physical units and 
9  monetary input-output tables (MIOTs). We start with an overview of key literature and methods and 
10  discuss each method’s data requirement, clarity of documentation, system boundaries and potential 
11  end-use resolution. We then focus on MIOT-based methods and provide a harmonized description of 
12  the procedures, rationales and methodological requirements. In section 3 we conclude on industry 
13  shipments  vs.  MIOTs,  and  on  the  different  MIOT-based  methods,  and  suggest  potential 
14  methodological improvements. In part II of this work, we apply the five identified methods, including 
15  the suggested improvements, to the data-rich case of the USA, as well as to major regions of a multi-
16  regional input-output model (Streeck et al., in revision_). 
2. Reviewing methods to derive end-use shares 
17 
18  To identify all original methods which exogenously derive end-use shares for inflow-driven dMFA, we 
19  focused on the English-language peer-reviewed literature as collected by two comprehensive reviews 
20  by E. Müller et al. (2014) and Lanau et al. (2019), searched Google Scholar, and applied citation 
21  snowballing, with a cut-off in January 2022. We did not aim to systematically cover every single study 
22  using these methods, but rather to identify and review pioneering studies and recent prominent 
23  applications. 
24  We found five original methods to derive material end-use shares, based on two widely used types of 
25  data sources (Table 1). Firstly, many studies used industry shipment data in physical units with typically 
26  3-10 end-uses (17 end-uses as exception, see Table 1). Secondly, we found four methods using MIOTs, 
27  resulting in 3-33 end-uses. As noted by Nakamura et al. (2014), we found that various terms were used 
28  to describe ‘end-use shares’, which suggests a lack of harmonized definitions. Terms ranged from 
29  ‘branching ratio’ (Spatari et al., 2005), ‘sector split’ (D. B. Müller et al., 2006), ‘distribution of resources 
30  among consumption products’ (Duchin & Levine, 2010), ‘share of each respective end-use’ (Hatayama 
31  et al., 2010),  ‘product-to-use matrix’ (Cullen et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2007), ‘allocation matrix’ (Cullen 
32  et al., 2012), ‘allocation matrix of materials to final products’ (Nakamura et al., 2014), to ‘split ratio of 
33  end-use sectors’ (Cao, Shen, Løvik, et al., 2017). The different terms already point towards specific 
4 
 

1  methods and scopes to derive end-use information. Herein, we consistently used the term ‘end-use 
2  shares’ and checked if the methods provide information on actual products or product groups, instead 
3  of only broad sectors, such as ‘construction’. 
4  Industry shipments were reported by statistical bureaus (e.g. International Steel Statistics Bureau), 
5  industry associations (e.g. International Wrought Copper Council), or geological surveys (e.g. USGS 
6  mineral  commodity  summaries;  Kelly  &  Matos,  2014).  Terminology  and  definitions  varied,  from 
7  ‘shipments […] to manufacturing and fabrication’ (Dahlström et al., 2004), ‘shipments by end-use‘ (The 
8  Aluminum Association, 2009), ‘apparent use […] by market‘ (PCA, 2016), or ‘supply […] in the end-use 
9  markets’ (CDA, 2020). Herein, we used the summary term ‘industry shipments’. Pioneering studies 
10  using  end-use  shares  derived  from  industry  shipments  started  in  the  1990s,  focusing  on  single 
11  materials and countries with good data availability (Dahlström et al., 2004; Melo, 1999; Zeltner et al., 
12  1999). Several studies followed that approach and extrapolated end-use shares available for only a 
13  few years and single countries, to conduct global, country-level, long-term modelling (Cao, Shen, Løvik, 
14  et al., 2017; Glöser et al., 2013; Liu & Müller, 2013; D. B. Müller et al., 2006; Pauliuk et al., 2013). See 
15  Table 1, and section 2.1. below for details. 
16  The second major approach, containing four original methods, utilized monetary input-output tables 
17  (MIOTs) to derive end-use shares (Table 1, and section 2.2. below). MIOTs report monetary flows 
18  between economic sectors, which can be used as proxy for physical flows, and are available from 
19  national statistics offices (e.g. US BEA, 2021). We identified 12 works that used national-level MIOTs 
20  to derive end-use shares, thereof 7 for Japan or the USA, which provide the most detailed MIOTs 
21  globally. National MIOTs were also integrated into global, multi-regional input-output models (MRIOs), 
22  starting in the 1990s (Inomata & Owen, 2014; Tukker et al., 2018), and some already in the 1970s 
23  (Lenzen et al., 2013; Lenzen et al., 2021). To our knowledge, Pauliuk et al. (2017) present the only 
24  empirical case using an MRIO with coverage of many countries/regions (25) for dMFA purposes.2 
 
2 We also identified one study that uses the physical-monetary hybrid unit input-output database EXIOBASE v3.3 instead of its purely monetary version to 
allocate an extension of material gross additions to stock (GAS) to industry and final demand sectors (Aguilar‐Hernandez et al. (2021)). The extension was 
constructed via mass-balancing resource use and waste accounts (Merciai and Schmidt (2018)). While the extension allows to determine the GAS used in an 
industry sectors’ products, it cannot directly discern the products that contain GAS in final demand and therefore cannot comprehensively allocate material use 
to end-use products (final products). Additionally, the construction of the extensions is difficult to repeat, related quality of waste data problematic (Tisserant 
et al. (2017)), and mixed-unit tables so far only available for a single year. For these reasons we decided to not list this approach as additional data source to 
 
derive end-use shares.
5 
 

Table 1: Overview of selected studies that use industry shipment data in physical units versus input-output tables in monetary units to derive material end-uses or end-use shares for (inflow-driven) dynamic Material 
Flow Analysis. Only highly cited or recent studies are listed for industry shipment data. 
Publication  Material flows  Geographical resol.  Time  End-uses  End-use source   Actual data on end-uses for: 
Zeltner et al. (1999)  Copper   USA  1900-2100  10  Black and Lyman (1990)  1975, 1989 
Melo (1999)  Aluminum  Germany  1970-2012  7  Metallgesellschaft and WBMS as cited in Melo 1999  1985-1995 
Dahlström et al. (2004)  Iron  &  steel,   UK  1958/68-2001  6/9  Alfed, WBMS, ISSB  1978-2011,  1958-1997,  1970-
aluminum   2000 
Spatari et al. (2005)  Copper   North America  1900-1999  10  various,  e.g.  U.S.  Bureau  of  Mines  (1941),  CDA  (1980),  unclear   
literature, expert knowledge 
D.  B.  Müller  et  al.  Iron  USA  1900-2004  4  AISI (domestic shipment), imports as domestic shares  1941-1999 
(2006) 
) 
s
e
lp Daigo et al. (2007)  Steel   Japan  1980-2000  7  JISF, 1971–2003  ~1971-2003 
m
a
x Kapur et al. (2008)  Cement   USA  1900-2005  7  USGS, PCA  unclear 
e
 t
n
e Hatayama et al. (2010)  Steel  42 countries  1980-2005  8  40 countries with 1-6 datapoints: JISEA, 1980-2005,  USA: AISI,  min. 1980, max. 2005, ~1960-
n
im
la 
1960-2006, Japan: JISF, 1971-2000  2006, ~1971-2000 
o
c is r p
y h  s( Du and Graedel (2011)  15 rare earths  Global, total**  1995-2007  17  USGS, CSRE (2008), JOGMEC (2007), MERI/J (2003), resolution  ~2007 
P t
n
e unclear (~China, Japan, USA) 
m
p
ih
Glöser et al. (2013)  Copper   Global, total  1910-2010  17  ICSG, ICA & Ayres et al. (2003), resolution unclear  1912-2008, 2006-2010 
s
y 
r
t
s
u
d
n Pauliuk et al. (2013)  Iron & steel   Global, country-level  1700-2008  4  USA: AISI (1941-2005), UK: ISSB (1979) & Dahlström et al.  2004,  1960-65  &  1970-2000, 
I
(2004), India: SERC  1995-1999 
Liu and Müller (2013)  Aluminum   Global, country-level  1900-2010  7  19 countries, various sources, e.g. WBMS, GARC, Alfed  min. 1950, max. 2010 
Cao, Shen, Løvik, et al.  Cement   Global, country-level  1950-2014  3  Statistics by industry experts, e.g. PCA,  Cembureau  min. ~1990, max. 2011 
(2017) 
Geyer et al. (2017)  Plastics   Global, total  1950-2015  7  Various, e.g. PlasticsEurope, ACC, CPMAI, for EU, USA, China,  2002-2014 
India  
L.  G.  Carmona  et  al.  Steel  in  UK  1960-2015  5  WSA and secondary data made available by Dahlström et al.  1978–2011,  see  Dahlström  et 
(2021)  transport sector   (2004) and Pauliuk et al. (2019)  al., unclear 
** however, some country-level results in text; ~indicates that the period is not entirely clear from documentation and that primary sources could not be accessed for checking; ACC = American Chemistry Council; Alfed = The Aluminum Federation; AISI = American Iron and Steel Institute; 
Cembureau = European Cement Association; CDA = Copper Development Association; CPMAI = Chemical and Petrochemicals Manufacturers’ Association India; CSRE = Chinese Society of Rare Earths; GARC = Global Aluminum Recycling Committee; ICA = International Copper Association; 
ICSG = International Copper Study Group; ISSB = Iron and Steel Statistics Bureau; JISEA = Japan Iron and Steel Exporters’ Association; JISF = The Japan Iron and Steel Federation; JOGMEC = Japan Oil, Gas and Metals National Corporation; MERI/J = Metal Economics Research Institute, Japan; 
PCA = U.S. Portland Cement Association; SERC = Spark Steel & Economy Research; USGS = United States Geological Survey; WBMS = World Bureau of Metal Statistics; WSA = World Steel Association 
6 
 

| )s            | Publication              | Material flows   | Geographical resol.   | Time         | End-uses   | End-use source                                                 | Actual data on end-uses for:   |
| e             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| lp            |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| m             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| a             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| x             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| e             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| tn            |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| e             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| n             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| im            |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| la            |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| c is o rp     |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| y h P s tn(   |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| e             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| m             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| p             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| ih            |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| s             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| y             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| rts           |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| u             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| d             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| n             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
| I             |                          |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
|:--------------|:-------------------------|:-----------------|:----------------------|:-------------|:-----------|:---------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------|
|               | Zeltner et al. (1999)    | Copper           | USA                   | 1900-2100    | 10         | Black and Lyman (1990)                                         | 1975, 1989                     |
|               | Melo (1999)              | Aluminum         | Germany               | 1970-2012    | 7          | Metallgesellschaft and WBMS as cited in Melo 1999              | 1985-1995                      |
|               | Dahlström et al. (2004)  | Iron & steel,    | UK                    | 1958/68-2001 | 6/9        | Alfed, WBMS, ISSB                                              | 1978-2011, 1958-1997, 1970-    |
|               |                          | aluminum         |                       |              |            |                                                                | 2000                           |
|               | Spatari et al. (2005)    | Copper           | North America         | 1900-1999    | 10         | various, e.g. U.S. Bureau of Mines (1941), CDA (1980),         | unclear                        |
|               |                          |                  |                       |              |            | literature, expert knowledge                                   |                                |
|               | D. B. Müller et al.      | Iron             | USA                   | 1900-2004    | 4          | AISI (domestic shipment), imports as domestic shares           | 1941-1999                      |
|               | (2006)                   |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
|               | Daigo et al. (2007)      | Steel            | Japan                 | 1980-2000    | 7          | JISF, 1971–2003                                                | ~1971-2003                     |
|               | Kapur et al. (2008)      | Cement           | USA                   | 1900-2005    | 7          | USGS, PCA                                                      | unclear                        |
|               | Hatayama et al. (2010)   | Steel            | 42 countries          | 1980-2005    | 8          | 40 countries with 1-6 datapoints: JISEA, 1980-2005, USA: AISI, | min. 1980, max. 2005, ~1960-   |
|               |                          |                  |                       |              |            | 1960-2006, Japan: JISF, 1971-2000                              | 2006, ~1971-2000               |
|               | Du and Graedel (2011)    | 15 rare earths   | Global, total**       | 1995-2007    | 17         | USGS, CSRE (2008), JOGMEC (2007), MERI/J (2003), resolution    | ~2007                          |
|               |                          |                  |                       |              |            | unclear (~China, Japan, USA)                                   |                                |
|               | Glöser et al. (2013)     | Copper           | Global, total         | 1910-2010    | 17         | ICSG, ICA & Ayres et al. (2003), resolution unclear            | 1912-2008, 2006-2010           |
|               | Pauliuk et al. (2013)    | Iron & steel     | Global, country-level | 1700-2008    | 4          | USA: AISI (1941-2005), UK: ISSB (1979) & Dahlström et al.      | 2004, 1960-65 & 1970-2000,     |
|               |                          |                  |                       |              |            | (2004), India: SERC                                            | 1995-1999                      |
|               | Liu and Müller (2013)    | Aluminum         | Global, country-level | 1900-2010    | 7          | 19 countries, various sources, e.g. WBMS, GARC, Alfed          | min. 1950, max. 2010           |
|               | Cao, Shen, Løvik, et al. | Cement           | Global, country-level | 1950-2014    | 3          | Statistics by industry experts, e.g. PCA, Cembureau            | min. ~1990, max. 2011          |
|               | (2017)                   |                  |                       |              |            |                                                                |                                |
|               | Geyer et al. (2017)      | Plastics         | Global, total         | 1950-2015    | 7          | Various, e.g. PlasticsEurope, ACC, CPMAI, for EU, USA, China,  | 2002-2014                      |
|               |                          |                  |                       |              |            | India                                                          |                                |
|               | L. G. Carmona et al.     | Steel in         | UK                    | 1960-2015    | 5          | WSA and secondary data made available by Dahlström et al.      | 1978–2011, see Dahlström et    |
|               | (2021)                   | transport sector |                       |              |            | (2004) and Pauliuk et al. (2019)                               | al., unclear                   |

Methods  Publication  Material flows  Geography/resolution  Time  End-uses  Source for IO table   Validation?* 
Waste Input-Output  Nakamura et al. (2014)  Steel in a car   Exemplary/Japanese  100 years  5  Japanese 2005  Comparison  to 
Approach to Material  data  industry dataŦ  
Flow Analysis (WIO- Pauliuk et al. (2017)  Steel   Global, 25 regions  2015-2100  10  EXIOBASE v2 2007  Sensitivity Analysis 
MFA)***  Yokoi et al. (2018)**  Copper   Japan  2011  16  Japanese 2011  No 
(Nakamura et al.,  Nakatani et al. (2020)  Plastic  containers  &  Japan  2015  Packaging (1)  Japanese  No 
2007; Nakamura &  packaging   2000/05/11/15 
Kondo, 2002;  Helbig et al. (2022)  7 metal elements  Global, global  1000 years  11  Combine EXIOBASE v3  Comparison to USGS 
Nakamura & 
2011 & Japanese 2005  2011  production 
Nakajima, 2005) 
data 
WIO-MFA +  W.-Q. Chen and Graedel (2015)  Aluminum   USA  1963-2007  motor vehicles (1)  U.S.  BEA  benchmark  Other  estimation 
s 
e transaction price  W.-Q. Chen (2017)  Aluminum   USA  1963-2007  33  (>100  1963-2007  methods 
lb
  y  a
T extension (see S 1.1)  products)   
r  t
a
t u
e n p t   WIO-MFA  +  Kondo et al. (2012)  17 materials  Japan  2000  10 (in 17 sectors)  Japanese 2000  No 
o u
M O
t- investment  matrix  Yokoi et al. (2022)**  Copper  Japan  1960-2015  16 (in 12 sectors)  Japanese  (1960-2015,  Comparison  to 
u
p
n
I (see S 1.1)  ~5 yearly)  literature 
Consumption-based  Hashimoto et al. (2007)  Construction minerals   Japan  1995  24  Japanese 1995  2nd  method 
accounting (CBA)   
CBA  +  investment  Dombi (2018)  Total  domestic  Hungary  1995-2015/  EXIOBASE  v2  EXIOBASE v2 2007, EU  Comparison  to 
matrix  (see S 1.1)  extraction  2001-2015  sectors (3 further  KLEMS, Hungarian  literature (Dombi et 
analyzed)  statistics  al., 2018) 
Ghosh-IO Absorbing  Duchin and Levine (2010)   Exemplary ‘resource’   exemplary  exemplary  3 exemplary  exemplary  - 
Markov Chains (AMC) 
Duchin and Levine (2013)  ‘Ores’  Global, 3 regions  1990  4  WTMBT 3 regions  - 
Partial  Ghosh-Input- Cao, Shen, Liu, et al. (2017)  Cement  China  1970-2013  3  Eora  national  table  Statistics  in  mass 
Output (IO)  1970-2013  1999/2000 
Aryapratama and Pauliuk (2019)  Wood   Indonesia  1961-2016  6  Indonesian 2010  No 
Ŧbased on Nakamura and Nakajima (2005), *of end-use shares, **Yokoi et al. (2018,2022) also apply transaction specific prices (in a price extension), ***multiple other studies apply WIO-MFA, mostly in static studies looking at a single year, e.g. in substance case studies Nakamura et al. 
(2009), as methodological development (Nakamura et al., 2011; Ohno, Matsubae, et al., 2017) or to track material flows through supply networks (W.-Q. Chen et al., 2016; Jiang et al., 2017; Nuss et al., 2019; Ohno et al., 2016). Schiller et al. (2017) also use MIOTs to estimate the direct 
material input (DMI) of stock-building materials going to ‘capital goods’. To the best of our knowledge, the authors understand capital goods as certain types of equipment not falling under buildings, infrastructure or consumer goods. From the documentation in Schiller et al. (2015) it 
seems that a classical Leontief model (CBA) was used with one particular category of final demand (‘Ausrüstung und sonstige Anlagen‘ = capital goods) to calculate end-uses. However, certain service flows in the inter-industry/technology matrix were not considered, which resembles 
aspects of WIO-MFA. Furthermore, the authors did not distinguish DMI output by MIOT sector but rather estimated DMI in capital goods by using the final demand category ‘capital goods’ as final demand vector, which is somewhat similar to disaggregated investment matrices. As the 
documentation does not give explicit formulas, we cannot surely allocate the cited work to a specific method. Eora = see Lenzen et al., 2013; AMC = Absorbing Markov Chains; KLEMS  = see O’Mahony & Timmer, 2009; EXIOBASE = see Stadler et al., 2018; U.S. BEA = United States of America 
Bureau of Economic Analysis;  WTMBT = World Trade Model with Bilateral Trade (Hammer Strømman & Duchin, 2006); USGS = United States Geological Survey
7 
 

| s       | Methods               | Publication                    | Material flows        | Geography/resolution   | Time       | End-uses           | Source for IO table   | Validation?*         |
| e       |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
| lb      |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
| a       |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
| y T     |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
| ra tu   |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
| te p    |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
| n tu    |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
| o M O   |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
| tu-     |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
| p       |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
| n       |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
| I       |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
|:--------|:----------------------|:-------------------------------|:----------------------|:-----------------------|:-----------|:-------------------|:----------------------|:---------------------|
|         | Waste Input-Output    | Nakamura et al. (2014)         | Steel in a car        | Exemplary/Japanese     | 100 years  | 5                  | Japanese 2005         | Comparison to        |
|         | Approach to Material  |                                |                       | data                   |            |                    |                       | industry dataŦ       |
|         | Flow Analysis (WIO-   |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
|         | MFA)***               |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
|         | (Nakamura et al.,     |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
|         | 2007; Nakamura &      |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
|         | Kondo, 2002;          |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
|         | Nakamura &            |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
|         | Nakajima, 2005)       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
|         |                       | Pauliuk et al. (2017)          | Steel                 | Global, 25 regions     | 2015-2100  | 10                 | EXIOBASE v2 2007      | Sensitivity Analysis |
|         |                       | Yokoi et al. (2018)**          | Copper                | Japan                  | 2011       | 16                 | Japanese 2011         | No                   |
|         |                       | Nakatani et al. (2020)         | Plastic containers &  | Japan                  | 2015       | Packaging (1)      | Japanese              | No                   |
|         |                       |                                | packaging             |                        |            |                    | 2000/05/11/15         |                      |
|         |                       | Helbig et al. (2022)           | 7 metal elements      | Global, global         | 1000 years | 11                 | Combine EXIOBASE v3   | Comparison to USGS   |
|         |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    | 2011 & Japanese 2005  | 2011 production      |
|         |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       | data                 |
|         | WIO-MFA +             | W.-Q. Chen and Graedel (2015)  | Aluminum              | USA                    | 1963-2007  | motor vehicles (1) | U.S. BEA benchmark    | Other estimation     |
|         | transaction price     |                                |                       |                        |            |                    | 1963-2007             | methods              |
|         | extension (see S 1.1) |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
|         |                       | W.-Q. Chen (2017)              | Aluminum              | USA                    | 1963-2007  | 33 (>100           |                       |                      |
|         |                       |                                |                       |                        |            | products)          |                       |                      |
|         | WIO-MFA +             | Kondo et al. (2012)            | 17 materials          | Japan                  | 2000       | 10 (in 17 sectors) | Japanese 2000         | No                   |
|         | investment matrix     |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
|         | (see S 1.1)           |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
|         |                       | Yokoi et al. (2022)**          | Copper                | Japan                  | 1960-2015  | 16 (in 12 sectors) | Japanese (1960-2015,  | Comparison to        |
|         |                       |                                |                       |                        |            |                    | ~5 yearly)            | literature           |
|         | Consumption-based     | Hashimoto et al. (2007)        | Construction minerals | Japan                  | 1995       | 24                 | Japanese 1995         | 2nd method           |
|         | accounting (CBA)      |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
|         | CBA + investment      | Dombi (2018)                   | Total domestic        | Hungary                | 1995-2015/ | EXIOBASE v2        | EXIOBASE v2 2007, EU  | Comparison to        |
|         | matrix (see S 1.1)    |                                | extraction            |                        | 2001-2015  | sectors (3 further | KLEMS, Hungarian      | literature (Dombi et |
|         |                       |                                |                       |                        |            | analyzed)          | statistics            | al., 2018)           |
|         | Ghosh-IO Absorbing    | Duchin and Levine (2010)       | Exemplary ‘resource’  | exemplary              | exemplary  | 3 exemplary        | exemplary             | -                    |
|         | Markov Chains (AMC)   |                                |                       |                        |            |                    |                       |                      |
|         |                       | Duchin and Levine (2013)       | ‘Ores’                | Global, 3 regions      | 1990       | 4                  | WTMBT 3 regions       | -                    |
|         | Partial Ghosh-Input-  | Cao, Shen, Liu, et al. (2017)  | Cement                | China                  | 1970-2013  | 3                  | Eora national table   | Statistics in mass   |
|         | Output (IO)           |                                |                       |                        |            |                    | 1970-2013             | 1999/2000            |
|         |                       | Aryapratama and Pauliuk (2019) | Wood                  | Indonesia              | 1961-2016  | 6                  | Indonesian 2010       | No                   |

1  2.1 Assessing industry shipments as approach to derive end-use shares 
2  At first sight, industry shipments are an attractive data source to derive end-use shares, as numerous 
3  studies show (Table 1). However, there are a number of critical limitations to be considered. These 
4  start with practical data scarcity and inaccessibility, as many times substantial fees or memberships 
5  have to be paid for (e.g. The Aluminum Association, 2009), and continue with poor documentation of 
6  data generation, system boundaries and end-use definitions, as well as the usually quite low product 
7  resolution. Consequently, when such data are applied, various extrapolations and assumptions are 
8  required to compensate for these specific limitations: 
9  Scarce coverage of space and time: industry shipment data require use of large-scale extrapolation.  
10  Pauliuk et al. (2013) for instance mapped industry shipment data for India (1995-99), the UK (1960-
11  65/1970-2000) and the USA (2004) to three sets of four end-use shares each (transport, construction, 
12  machinery, products) and used the derived shares as time-constant for all countries globally. The 
13  authors then optimized international end-use shares by selecting those shares resulting in the best 
14  scrap market balance. 
15  Incomplete reporting of material flows: data at times reflect only a share of total economy-wide 
16  material use or production, which is not always transparently reported, e.g. the inclusion of imports 
17  of materials  contained  in final  products  (end-uses) can  remain  unclear (Pauliuk  et  al.,  2013).  To 
18  nonetheless  achieve  coverage  of  economy-wide  material  flows,  end-use  shares  derived  from 
19  shipments are often combined with independent estimates of total apparent consumption or gross 
20  additions stocks to derive total material end-use. 
21  Ignoring subsequent trade flows: data can either refer to shipments to manufacturing sectors (mostly 
22  for highly manufactured materials, e.g. steel to automotive), in which case trade of final products is 
23  not  included;  or  to  shipments  to  final  markets  for  which  trade  is  included  (mostly  for  less 
24  manufactured materials, e.g. cement to residential buildings). If large quantities of a material are 
25  embedded in traded goods, such as electronics, the computation of apparent final consumption as 
26  output + imports – exports is essential (Daniel B. Müller et al., 2011).  
27  Ignoring subsequent waste flows: if waste flows are high, such as in aerospace manufacturing or parts 
28  of  vehicle  manufacturing  (Milford  et  al.,  2011),  they  need  to  be  deducted  from  the  materials 
29  consumed by end-use sectors, which is seldomly reported in studies. 
30  Ambiguous system boundaries of end-use categories: certain categories such as ‘construction’ are very 
31  broad  and  might  contain  only  the  materials  used  for  construction  products  such  as  buildings, 
32  infrastructure, etc., or refer to sectoral activities which can for instance also contain construction 
8 
 

1  machinery and tools. For example, in the USA the latter is the case for copper end-use statistics, while 
2  it is not specified for aluminum in the publicly available data sources (CDA, 2020; Kelly & Matos, 2014; 
3  The Aluminum Association, 2009).  
4  Incoherent system boundaries across materials: definitions of end-uses differ across materials, e.g. 
5  material use for ‘containers and packaging’ is reported as own category in U.S. aluminum, but included 
6  in the category ‘others’ for iron and steel statistics (W.-Q. Chen & Graedel, 2015).  
7  Potential  for  misclassification:  reported  industry  shipments  to  end-uses  might  actually  be 
8  intermediate products, which are supplied to other end-use products. Ohno, Fukushima, et al. (2017) 
9  gave the example of ‘electric and electronics equipment’ being delivered to the ‘automobile industry’ 
10  in which case part of the material in the first end-use would be misclassified. 
11  Non-descriptive  and  unclear  end-use  definitions:  where  substantial  shipments  to  sectors  such  as 
12  ‘service centers’ or ‘other’ are reported, for which the actual end-use of the respective shipments 
13  remains unclear (Pauliuk et al., 2013; USGS, 2018). 
14  Low  end-use  resolution:  the  resolution  of  shipments’  destination  (end-use)  is  often  on  a  more 
15  aggregated sectoral rather than product level (W.-Q. Chen & Graedel, 2015; Ohno, Fukushima, et al., 
16  2017).3 
17  2.2 Assessing monetary input-output tables as approach to derive end-use shares (MIOTs) 
18  MIOTs are derived from the System of National Accounts, thereby following a national, economy-wide 
19  system boundary, and report on the sectoral interdependencies of an economy (United Nations, 2009, 
20  2014). They are widely available (e.g. US MIOTs since 1947), cover all economic sectors, including 
21  material production, and show medium to high sector resolution which enables detailed modelling of 
22  end-use sectors or even products (W.-Q. Chen & Graedel, 2015). However, utilizing MIOTs as proxy 
23  for  physical  flows  requires  several  assumptions,  the  most  prominent  being  the  assumption  of 
24  homogenous prices for each sector and product group output, and assuming proportionality between 
25  monetary and physical flows (Bullard & Herendeen, 1975; Weisz & Duchin, 2006).4 
 
3 Some studies take additional steps to improve the quality of industry shipment data or fit additional data to their purpose. For instance, as mentioned above, 
Pauliuk et al. (2013) optimized limited information on end-use shares against scrap market balances. Spatari et al. (2005) consulted with industry and academic 
experts. Daigo et al. (2007) and Hatayama et al. (2010) refined end-use resolution by splitting Japanese steel industry shipments for ‘automobiles’, into ‘trucks’ 
and ‘passenger vehicles’, through the assumption of a 2:1 weight ratio derived from the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association (2000); or by splitting 
steel industry shipments for 42 countries to the end-use ‘construction’ into ‘civil engineering’ and ‘buildings’, based on the relationship of the two end-uses with 
 
population density for Japanese prefectures.
4 In reality, prices vary by seller-buyer relationships, commodity type and geography, the aggregation of which can lead to biased estimation of environmental 
burden (Jakobs et al. 2021). In MRIOs, currency conversion (see, for example, Stadler et al. (2018)) and relative price levels among countries can lead to additional 
over- or underestimation of environmental burden, if prices deviate from the homogenous sector average. Furthermore, MIOTs represent a model in which 
primary data collected through national accounting first need to be compiled into supply-use tables and/or balanced MIOTs, with a number of underlying 
assumptions and resulting caveats, e.g. limited sector resolution due to reasons of confidentiality (Eurostat (2008); R. E. Miller and Blair (2009); United Nations 
(2009)). Also the import proportionality assumption for trade flows into individual industrial sectors (Schulte et al. (2021)), and, in the case of single-regional 
MIOTs, the domestic technology assumption apply (Bouwmeester and Oosterhaven (2013); Lenzen et al. (2004)). 
9 
 

1  To facilitate the description of the four MIOT-based methods to derive end-use shares, Figure 2 
2  illustrates the schematic of a MIOT. In the equations below, non-italic, non-bold lower-case letters 
3  (like ‘a’) denote vectors and italic, non-bold lower-case letters (like ‘c’) denote scalars or elements of 
4  vectors/matrices. Non-italic, bold uppercase letters (like ‘B’)  stand for matrices. i and j stand for row 
5  and column indices respectively. e stands for appropriate column vector for summation that contains 
6  only ones. ^ denotes diagonalization of a vector.  
7   
8 
Figure 2: Schematic input-output table (IOT) with exemplary three sectors corresponding to materials, intermediate or consumer products, 
9 
and services. The labels for the table’s compartments are used in subsequent equations. hh = household consumption, gov = government 
10 
consumption, gfcf = gross fixed capital formation. 
11  For transparent comparison of the four methods below, we define the end-use share matrix 𝐃 which 
12  satisfies the following conditions: 0 ≤ 𝑑  ≤ 1 , ∑ 𝑑 = 1. 𝐃 can come in two different forms: for 
𝑖𝑗 𝑗 𝑖𝑗
13  𝐃  an element 𝑑  indicates the share of sector output i (e.g., a material; row) contained in the 
[𝑀𝑒𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑑] 𝑖𝑗
14  deliveries of sector j (column) to final demand, j therein identified as end-use sector for i (the index 
15  [𝑀𝑒𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑑] referring to one of the four identified methods in sections 2.2.1-2.2.4: WIO-MFA, CBA, 
16  Ghosh-IO AMC, and Partial Ghosh-IO). For 𝐃  an element 𝑑  states the share of a natural 
[𝑀𝑒𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑑]_𝑟𝑒𝑠 𝑖𝑗
17  resource or material (e.g., an ore) listed in the extension table 𝐅 that is allocated to the deliveries of 
18  sector j to final demand. In here, we primarily show the calculation of  𝐃 . The two forms of 𝐃 
[𝑀𝑒𝑡ℎ𝑜𝑑]
19  can be transformed into each other, using a matrix of allocation factors of environmental indicators 
in satellite 𝐅 to sectors j (𝐒̄, for details see supplementary information two (SI 1b)). 
20 
21  2.2.1 The Waste Input-Output Approach to Material Flow Analysis (WIO-MFA) 
22  WIO-MFA  was  first  presented  in  Nakamura  and  Nakajima  (2005),  introducing  a  mass-balanced 
23  material  flow  analysis  perspective  to  MIOTs.  WIO-MFA  uses  monetary  transaction  data  to 
24  approximate the flow of materials into downstream supply chain products at their actual mass. For 
25  this purpose, WIO-MFA introduces filter matrices which exclude all monetary inputs that do not 
10 
 

1  become part of the physical  product output of an industrial sector (e.g., automobile production 
2  produces automobiles). The mass filter matrix ɸ  excludes all monetary inputs that represent non-
𝐌𝐚𝐬𝐬
3  physical transactions (i.e. service transactions in unmodified MIOTs in Figure 2), and the yield factor 
4  matrix 𝚪 deducts part of the monetary transactions as processing waste, the remainder of which (1-𝚪) 
5  defines a waste fraction. Both matrices are multiplied element-wise (Hadamard product ʘ) with the 
6  technology matrix 𝐀 to exclude non-physical transactions and separate waste flows (Equation 1): 
Ã =  𝐀 ʘ ɸ  ʘ 𝚪  Equation 1 
𝐌𝐚𝐬𝐬
7  Ã is furthermore partitioned according to the degree of the sector output’s fabrication. Ã  is a 
𝑚,𝑝
8  matrix  with  only  non-zero  elements  for  those  transactions  where  ‘materials’ i  become  part  of 
9  ‘products’ j (see Figure 2). Ã  is a matrix with only non-zero elements for ‘products’ i becoming part 
𝑝,𝑝
10  of other ‘products’ j.5 This partition is crucial to enforce mass-balance across the WIO-MFA model 
11  (Nakamura et al., 2007).  
12  From these two matrices, a material composition matrix 𝐂 is calculated (Equation 2). Each coefficient 
13  of 𝐂 states the concentration of materials in product output to final demand, i.e. the material input i 
14  per (monetary) output of product j leaving the inter-industry system towards final demand.  
𝐂 = Ã  (𝐈 − Ã )−1   Equation 2 
𝑚,𝑝 𝑝,𝑝
15  To obtain 𝐂, a calculation similar to obtaining the Leontief inverse is conducted, with the difference 
16  that the inter-industry system is cut off towards upstream material sectors. Thus 𝐂 does not represent 
17  supply chain wide requirements, but a material concentration matrix, in which the exogenous direct 
18  material input i to product j (Ã ) is delivered to an industry subsystem (Ã ), which traces product-
𝑚,𝑝 𝑝,𝑝
19  to-product flows only. 𝐂 coefficients can be in either monetary, hybrid or physical units depending on 
20  the original units of the partitioned Ã matrix. WIO-MFA equation 2 is the analogue of a Leontief price 
21  model,  just  that  the  material  concentration  table 𝐂 is  substituted  for  the  commodity  price  and 
22  exogenous material input for value added (for detailed explanation, see SI 1b). 
23  To calculate the end-use share matrix 𝐃 , i.e., the output share of material i (e.g. cement) as 
WIO
24  product j (e.g. a house) to final demand y, material composition 𝐂 is post-multiplied with final demand 
25  ŷ and divided by total output of material i contained in all products j (Equation 3, Nakamura et al., 
26  2014).  
𝐃 = (̂ 𝐂 y)−1𝐂 ŷ    Equation 3 
𝐖𝐈𝐎
 
5 In how far ‘service’ sectors can also be classified as ‘products’ and thus have non-zero sector in/outputs is discussed in section 3.2 
11 
 

1  Below, we briefly discuss studies that used WIO-MFA to split aggregate material flows to end-uses 
2  (see Table 1). 
3  Nakamura et al. (2014) developed the MaTrace model, a combination of dMFA and a linear IO-model, 
4  to trace material flows through their lifecycle, amongst others, to end-use products. The authors 
5  applied the model to trace ferrous materials in Japanese passenger cars and used the WIO-MFA 
6  method together with the Japanese MIOT for the year 2005 to generate an end-use share matrix for 
7  refined materials. Pauliuk et al. (2017) extended the model by Nakamura et al. (2014) to MaTrace 
8  Global which covers steel flows in the global economy in 25 regions. They used the MRIO database 
9  EXIOBASE v2 for the year 2007 in combination with WIO-MFA to calculate the end-use share matrix 
10  for all regions. Several other studies used and extended upon the original MaTrace model, including 
11  MaTrace-alloy (Nakamura et al., 2017), MaTrace-multi (Helbig et al., 2022), and various case studies 
12  (e.g. Godoy León et al., 2020; Jarrín Jácome et al., 2021; Klose & Pauliuk, 2021; Takeyama et al., 2016; 
13  not all of them used WIO-MFA to derive end-use shares). Nakamura and Kondo (2018) presented a 
14  dynamic model for the Waste-Input-Output method by integrating it with MaTrace-alloy, which also 
15  comprised an end-use share matrix.  
16  Yokoi et al. (2018) proposed an approach to distinguish pathways of material flows which accumulate 
17  as end-use products in final demand versus in endogenous (inter-industry) sectors, those that are 
18  accompanying  product  flows  (e.g.  packaging),  and  those  which  dissipate  within  industries.  They 
19  applied it for WIO-MFA and copper flows in Japan (2011). Additionally, the authors proposed a new 
20  approach to distinguish materials in different processing forms for WIO-MFA (2.1.4. in Yokoi et al.), 
21  which is similar to the Hypothetical Extraction Method that has been proposed for the Leontief model 
22  (Dietzenbacher et al., 2019; Hertwich, 2021) and with similar outcome to a method already introduced 
23  in  the  original  WIO-MFA  publication  by  Nakamura  et  al.  (2007).  The  approaches  to  distinguish 
24  materials in different processing forms are also important for differentiating end-uses and are further 
25  elaborated on in section 3.2. The approach of Yokoi et al. (2018) was furthermore applied by Nakatani 
26  et al. (2020) who traced the flows of plastic containers and packaging in Japan.6 
27  2.2.2 Consumption-based accounting (CBA)  
28  CBA is widely used to estimate so-called environmental footprints (Galli et al., 2012; Wiedmann et al., 
29  2006; Wiedmann & Lenzen, 2018). Here, environmental burdens from socio-economic activity are 
30  allocated  to  categories  of  final  demand,  depicting  the  ‘embodied’  environmental  burdens 
 
6 Building upon WIO-MFA, also problems other than end-use shares can be tackled, e.g. by relating the flows of materials in MIOTs to a product unit, similar to 
the functional unit in Life Cycle Assessment ‘(UPIOM = unit physical input-output by materials; Nakamura et al. (2011)), using WIO-MFA for linear optimization 
of vehicle recycling (Ohno, Matsubae, et al. (2017)), and for tracing material flows through supply chain networks (e.g. W.-Q. Chen et al. (2016); Nuss et al. 
(2019); Ohno et al. (2016)). 
12 
 

1  accumulating along (global) supply chains. To estimate the flow of embodied environmental burdens 
2  per  sector,  i.e.  sector  footprint  𝐅 ,  an  environmental  extension  𝐅  (expressing  the  absolute 
𝑠
3  environmental  burden  by  sector)  is  divided  by  total  output  x ,  and  multiplied  with  the  total 
4  requirement matrix 𝐋 and the vector of final demand y (Equation 4):  
𝐅 =   𝐅 x̂−1 𝐋 ̂y  Equation 4 
𝑠
5  The environmental extension 𝐅 can be constructed either as supply or as use-extension (Owen et al., 
6  2017; Wieland et al., 2020). For materials, a supply-extension translates to the supply or extraction of 
7  raw  materials  (e.g.  limestone)  by  different  sectors  which  is  distributed  to  the  economy.  A  use-
8  extension refers to semi-manufactured goods that are used further downstream the supply chain (e.g., 
9  cement made from limestone and used in construction), and whose corresponding row in the 𝐙 matrix 
10  is replicated as row in the 𝐅 matrix. Depending on extension choice, the footprint 𝐅  has different 
𝑠
11  interpretations:  for  the  supply-extension,  element 𝑓  of  matrix 𝐅  represents  the  accumulated 
𝑖,𝑗 𝑠
12  amount of natural resource i (e.g. limestone or iron ore), while for the use-extension the accumulated 
13  amount of material i (e.g. cement or steel), that is required for producing the final demand for sector j. 
14  From  equation  4,  the  end-use  share  matrix 𝐃 ,  can  be  calculated  via  Equation  5,  with 
𝐂𝐁𝐀_𝐫𝐞𝐬
15  coefficients 𝑑  representing the share of environmental burden 𝐅 that is embodied in final demand 
𝑖,𝑗
16  of sector j. 𝐃 , i.e. the share of sector output i that is embodied in final demand of sector output j, 
𝐂𝐁𝐀
17  can be calculated via Equation 6. Compared to WIO-MFA, 𝐃  does not solely contain end-use shares 
𝐂𝐁𝐀
18  for ‘materials’ but also for all other MIOT sectors (potentially including both ‘products’ and ‘services’ 
19  in the sense of Figure 2). 
𝐃 =  (𝐅 e)−1 𝐅   Equation 5 
𝐂𝐁𝐀_𝐫𝐞𝐬 𝑠 𝑠
𝐃 =  (𝐋 y)−1 𝐋 ŷ  Equation 6 
𝐂𝐁𝐀
20  For  CBA,  the  end-use  shares 𝐝  calculated  for  sector output j  include  all  upstream  direct  and 
𝐂𝐁𝐀
21  indirect (raw) material, product and service inputs, also those that might not become physical part of 
22  the output to final demand j. These include both, monetary transactions that have been assigned 
23  physical material via the proportionality assumption of monetary and physical flows, but are most 
24  likely not of physical nature (i.e. services), and monetary transactions (or fractions of those) that are 
25  physical, but refer to waste flows which do not become part of end-use products (e.g. new scrap 
26  during manufacturing). Thus, the end-use share for a physical product j represents embodied material 
13 
 

1  use, different from the actual material mass of the physical product like for WIO-MFA. In effect, these 
2  properties lead to misclassifications of material end-uses.7,8 
3  Hashimoto et al. (2007) used CBA with a type of use-extension for a Japanese MIOT for 1995 to allocate 
4  the Japanese domestic production of construction minerals (cement, sand and gravel, crushed stone) 
5  to 24 material end-uses. The authors compared end-use results with a second estimation method, 
6  which they deemed more reliable than CBA. Also Dombi (2018) used CBA with supply-extension to 
7  distribute total domestic extraction to end-uses (for details see S 1.2). 
8  2.2.3 Ghosh Input-Output Absorbing Markov Chains (Ghosh-IO AMC) 
9  Duchin and Levine (2010) proposed an input-output notation to Absorbing Markov Chains (AMC) and 
10  introduced a framework to trace the number of times a resource flows through the industrial network 
11  (‘resource-specific networks’). Duchin and Levine (2013) extended this approach to only track those 
12  flows going to a single final product (‘resource end-use networks’), which can be used to calculate 
13  end-use shares.  
14  The AMCs’ central element is the so called transition matrix, i.e. documenting the probability of 
15  transitioning between two previously defined states, e.g. the transformation of a resource into an 
16  intermediate product. Duchin and Levine (2010) proposed that for IOA, the transition coefficients 
17  represent the proportion of a resource transitioning to a product. This definition in IOA terms can be 
18  understood as the direct output coefficients matrix 𝐁 = x̂−1𝐙. 
19  Similar to WIO-MFA, Duchin and Levine (2010) introduced supply-chain directionality according to the 
20  degree of a product’s fabrication into their model. They achieved this by partitioning the matrix 𝐙’s 
21  sectors  into  resources  (which  we  here  call  materials  m  to  align  with  WIO-MFA  notation)  and 
22  products p where only the two right-sided quadrants are non-zero (Equation 7). The direct output 
23  coefficients matrix 𝐐 denotes that materials can become part of intermediate products (𝐙 ) and the 
𝑚,𝑝
24  latter can become part of the same or other intermediate products (𝐙 ), while excluding other 
𝑝,𝑝
25  directionalities: 
 
7 An example would be monetary transactions recorded between ‘physical materials’ (e.g. cement) to a non-physical service (e.g. government services), which 
in turn delivers a service transaction to another physical end-use product (e.g. a house). Through the physical extension in CBA, the service-input ‘government 
services’ to the ‘house’ would then be associated with a physical ‘cement’ flow and thus add to the footprint of the ‘house’, although the service-transaction 
does not contain a physical flow in reality. 
8 As extension to CBA, the endogenization of capital flows into footprints of final consumption, i.e. the treatment of capital goods not as final demand but as 
intermediate inputs to  production, has been discussed in the literature and applied for materials (T. R. Miller et al. (2019); C.-J. H. Södersten et al. (2018)). This 
method was termed ‘capital-augmented material footprints’ (C.-J. Södersten et al. (2020)) and allocates resource use embodied in capital goods used by industry 
(e.g. machinery and buildings), to the respective industry output to final consumption. The system boundaries of this method are not suited to determine 
material end-uses in actual mass, because in addition to the embodied perspective of CBA, it allocates materials embodied in the endogenized capital goods 
downstream to goods and services for final consumption (i.e. gross fixed capital formation ‘gfcf’ allocated to consumption of households ‘hh’ and government 
‘gov’ in Figure 2). 
 
14 
 

0 𝐙 𝑚,𝑝  Equation 7 
𝐐 = x̂−1 (  )  
0 𝐙
𝑝,𝑝
1  Additionally to directionality, the IO-AMC defines absorbing states which once entered, ‘capture’ 
2  associated flows (‘consumption goods’). Duchin and Levine (2010) defined these states as matrix 𝐑  
3  (Equation  8)  which  gives  the  share  of  final  demand y in  total  gross  production  of  products  (p). 
4  Materials  (m)  are  assumed  to  not  directly  transition  to  final  demand,  but  first  become  part  of 
5  intermediate  products  (thus  zero).  If  transactions  in  original 𝐙 and y are  deleted, x requires  re-
6  calculation before calculating 𝐐 and 𝐑.  
0 Equation 8 
𝐑 =  
x̂−1ŷ
𝑝 𝑝
7  To trace flows over the whole supply chain, the inverse of 𝐐 is calculated (which is similar to the Ghosh 
8  inverse 𝐆). Multiplying this inverse with 𝐑 yields the distribution of sector outputs i to final demand 
9  as product j (Equation 9). Like for CBA, 𝐃  includes shares for all sectors defined in the MIOT used. 
𝐀𝐌𝐂
𝐃 = (𝐈 − 𝐐)−1 𝐑  Equation 9 
𝐀𝐌𝐂
10  Duchin  and  Levine  (2013)  applied  the  framework  to  the  world  trade  model  with  bilateral  trade 
11  (Hammer Strømman & Duchin, 2006), tracing the use of ores to four end-uses. Besides this study, we 
12  are not aware of any other application of this framework.  
13  In the distinction of materials, intermediate and consumption products, the proposed Ghosh-IO AMC 
14  corresponds closely to WIO-MFA. In contrast, like for CBA, Ghosh-IO AMC does not remove waste 
15  flows and, depending on the definition of sectors, might also include services (which would translate 
16  to a consumption-based footprint perspective).  
17  2.2.4 Partial Ghosh Input-Output (IO) 
18  In their work on stocks and flows of cement and wood, Cao, Shen, Liu, et al. (2017) and Aryapratama 
19  and Pauliuk (2019) used procedures that are similar to the first steps of the Ghosh-IO AMC in order to 
20  derive  end-use  shares 𝐃.  However,  the  authors  used  a  modified  version  of  the  direct  output 
21  coefficients matrix 𝐁, which is why we termed their approach Partial Ghosh-IO. While in the Ghosh 
22  model, 𝐁 is calculated with gross output x, the two studies only used the intermediate output, i.e. 
23  summing over the row elements in the inter-industry transaction matrix 𝐙 (x ). Hereafter, this 
INTER 
24  matrix is termed 𝐁  in which the resulting coefficients give the direct allocation of a sectors 
𝐈𝐍𝐓𝐄𝐑
25  output to all inter-industry sectors (Equation 10). Thus, the summation of elements in rows adds up 
26  to one.  
15 
 

𝐁 = x̂−1  𝐙  Equation 10 
𝐈𝐍𝐓𝐄𝐑 INTER
1  To calculate the distribution over supply chain steps, Cao, Shen, Liu, et al. (2017) and Aryapratama 
2  and Pauliuk (2019) defined sectors as either intermediate or end-use: intermediate sectors deliver 
3  100% of their output further downstream the supply chain to other intermediate or end-use sectors; 
4  end-use sectors only receive inputs from intermediate sectors, which are assumed to be delivered in 
5  full to final demand (the absorbing state in AMC terms). Materials (m), like defined in the Ghosh-IO 
6  AMC, are part of intermediate products (p) in this method. Material flows are traced manually to 
7  several downstream steps in the supply chain until they reach end-use. Here, we formalized the 
8  procedure using matrix notation: analogous to Equation 7, we first partitioned 𝐁  into 𝐐  
𝐈𝐍𝐓𝐄𝐑 INTER
9  with the individual rows/columns reflecting intermediate (p) and end-use products (c), respectively. 
10  Only flows of intermediates (to intermediate use and end-use) were non-zero (Equation 11): 
𝐁 𝐁 Equation 11 
𝐈𝐍𝐓𝐄𝐑 𝐈𝐍𝐓𝐄𝐑
𝐐 =  𝑝,𝑝 𝑝,𝑐 
INTER
0 0
11  Second,  we  computed  the  Ghosh-inverse of 𝐐  i.e. 𝐃  where  the  top  right  quadrant 
INTER 𝐏−𝐆𝐇𝐎𝐒𝐇
12  𝐃  contained the end-use share matrix, reflecting the flow of intermediates (p, for this 
𝐏−𝐆𝐇𝐎𝐒𝐇
𝑝,𝑐
13  method including materials m) to end-uses (c, Equation 12):  
𝐃 𝐃 Equation 12 
𝐏−𝐆𝐇𝐎𝐒𝐇 𝑝,𝑝 𝐏−𝐆𝐇𝐎𝐒𝐇 𝑝,𝑐 = (𝐈 − 𝐐 )−1  
𝐈𝐍𝐓𝐄𝐑
0 0
14  Cao, Shen, Liu, et al. (2017) applied this method to the Chinese inter-industry transaction matrices for 
15  1970-2013 from the global MRIO Eora (Lenzen et al., 2013). The authors distributed the apparent 
16  consumption of cement according to the derived end-use shares along up to two intermediate supply-
17  chain steps, before arriving at end-use, and deducted 1.5% material losses during transportation. Out 
18  of a total of 122 sectors in the Eora MIOTs, the authors aggregated 113 sectors to three end-use 
19  sectors (agriculture, buildings, infrastructure). For the years 1999 & 2000, the authors found a close 
20  fit  between  the  derived  cement  use  in  buildings  and  statistics  from  the  China  Building  Industry 
21  Yearbook (NBSC, 2002).  
22  Aryapratama and Pauliuk (2019) used the inter-industry matrix of the Indonesian national MIOT for 
23  2010 and distributed the apparent consumption of wood/roundwood, pulp, sawnwood and wood-
24  based  panels  to  six  end-use  categories  (paper  &  packaging,  furniture,  buildings,  infrastructure, 
25  agriculture, others). Export of end-use products was only considered for furniture, as for other end-
26  uses, monetary export flows reported in the MIOT were small compared to final demand. 
16 
 

1  In  addition  to  the  four  methods  described  here,  we  found  dMFA  studies  that  applied  extra 
2  modifications to MIOTs (i.e. use of investment matrices & transaction specific prices). These are 
3  described in SI 1a. 
3. Discussion 
4 
5  3.1 Using industry shipment and monetary input-output data for global end-use shares 
6  If available at sufficient detail and suitable sectoral resolution, end-use shares derived from industry 
7  shipments  in  physical  units  are  superior  to  monetary  data  as  they  resemble  more  closely  the 
8  biophysical flows modeled in dMFA. In practice, however, industry shipment data are scarce in terms 
9  of tempo-spatial coverage, usually yield low end-use resolution, and are prone to misclassification of 
10  end-use categories and partial system coverage (see section 2.1). For individual countries with good 
11  data availability, industry shipments are well suited to differentiate end-uses. For the systematic 
12  compilation of end-use shares for economy-wide material use across multiple materials, years, and 
13  countries, available data are limited and their potential largely exploited (Table 1).  
14  Therefore, monetary input-output tables (MIOTs) represent a complementary data source due to their 
15  global availability, often relatively high resolution of countries and sectors, and their economy-wide 
16  coverage. The few studies that compared end-uses derived from MIOTs with other methods for a 
17  handful of years and three countries, mostly found good agreement (Cao, Shen, Liu, et al., 2017; W.-
18  Q. Chen, 2017; W.-Q. Chen & Graedel, 2015; Hashimoto et al., 2007). However, the assumptions that 
19  apply to the environmental extension of MIOTs, as described in section 2.2, need to be considered 
20  when evaluating results. Additionally, the following specifics of MIOTs call for further investigation: 
21  Firstly, the quality and differentiation of end-use data relies on the quality of specific MIOTs, for both 
22  the number of sectors and the way these are defined. While previous work mostly utilized high-
23  resolution country-level MIOTs (i.e. USA and Japan, see Table 1), such detailed MIOTs are hardly 
24  available for other countries. For MRIOs, substantial efforts have been made to improve sectoral 
25  resolution, especially in the primary extractive industries. This influences two properties which can 
26  strongly impact results: first, how environmental extensions can be matched to MIOT sectors and 
27  which assumptions are required to allocate materials or energy, which are usually reported with 
28  system boundaries different from those of MIOT sectors (Inomata & Owen, 2014; Owen et al., 2017; 
29  Tukker et al., 2018; Wieland et al., 2020); and second, the accuracy of downstream tracing (i.e. the 
30  more disaggregated the supply-chain of materials, the better suited are assumed average material 
31  intensities  and  output  structure,  leading  to  more  accurate  tracing  (Lenzen,  2011)).9 For  end-use 
 
9 Consider, for example, the flows of indium and iron trough the MIOT. Indium quickly changes form an becomes part of electronics and other manufactured 
goods, so that the MIOT has no accurate data on the whereabouts of indium, but uses proxy data on the whereabouts of electronics to trace the estimate use 
17 
 

1  sectors, however, the resolution is often quite low. For instance, ‘construction’ is responsible for the 
2  lions share of global material use, but represents only one sector in many MRIOs, which is problematic 
3  if  one  wants  to  distinguish  between  residential  buildings,  infrastructure,  etc.  (Krausmann, 
4  Wiedenhofer, et al., 2017; Lenzen et al., 2013; Stadler et al., 2018). Only the recently published GLORIA 
5  MRIO at least distinguishes ‘all buildings’ and civil engineering (Lenzen et al., 2021). Also at high MIOT 
6  product resolution, some end-use product stocks can show large differences to physical accounts (W.-
7  Q. Chen, 2017), which merits the question how reliable the interpretation of results for individual 
8  MIOT sectors is.10 In part II of this review, we empirically investigate these issues (Streeck et al., in 
9  revision_). 
10  Secondly, the system boundaries of MIOTs differ from those of dMFA. On an aggregate level, MIOT 
11  transactions are similar to dMFA flows, except for that they also contain waste (Figure 3: 1) and service 
12  flows (Figure 3: 2). For instance, final demand 𝐘 is similar to the gross additions to stock (GAS) in dMFA, 
13  while including demand for services and waste treatment.  
14  On a fine-grained level, dMFA is interested in tracing material flows into use either as a product (e.g. 
15  steel use in a building), an activity (e.g. steel use in health care), or a product within an activity (e.g. 
16  steel in buildings used in health care). In their default configuration, MIOTs take a product perspective 
17  by tracking materials into products for final use when these enter final demand (United Nations, 2009). 
18  The physical use of MIOT products in different activities cannot be identified with standard input-
19  output  analysis  but  would  require  augmentation  with  further  data. 11 Rather,  the  in-use  stock 
20  requirements for activities are assumed to be provided by industrial assets and other durable products 
21  in the form of services. 
 
shares of indium. For iron, which mostly ends up in steel, the situation is different, since steel is a separate product category in most MIOTs (sometimes even 
several downstream processing forms of iron distinguished), and the table data thus more accurately reflects whereabouts and average material intensities. 
10 Additionally, while national MIOTs follow internationally harmonized principles (United Nations (2009)), national specificities apply, regarding national 
statistical efforts and procedures in data gathering and aggregation as well as estimation procedures, nationally specific decisions for sectoral (dis)aggregation 
(e.g. confidentiality and/or national interests), or issues of ownership (e.g. state-owned housing vs privately-owned buildings means that substantial final 
demand is either part of households, or government expenditures). Available MRIOs try to reconcile national definitions, data gaps, as well as often mismatching 
 
and conflicting data using various techniques (Tukker et al. (2018).
11 To identify the physical material flows into activities, the material deliveries to these accounts would require re-routing to using industries via the use of 
capital flow/investment matrices (Lenzen and Treloar (2005); Pauliuk et al. (2015)), which could happen in a particular configuration of capital-augmented 
material flow tracing (in contrast to capital-augmented footprints; C.-J. Södersten et al. (2020)). 
18 
 

1   
2  Figure 3: Schematic representation of monetary input-output table (MIOT) structure and identified points for potential 
3  inconsistencies with system boundaries of dynamic Material Flow Analysis when determining end-use as sector output 
4  deliveries from the inter-industry system to final demand/use. GAS = gross additions to stock, SERV = service flows, TRANS = 
5  product flows transformed into products. 
6  Small discrepancies exist that complicate matching MIOTs to dMFA system boundaries: intermediate 
7  demand refers to the transactions that are input to an industry and are either ‘entirely used up’ or 
8  ‘transformed’ and become part of the industry’s output (United Nations, 2009: 6.224, 10.35). However, 
9  it also includes smaller maintenance, repairs and tools (United Nations, 2009: 6.225, 6.226). Therefore, 
10  when using MIOTs, we cannot be sure exactly which part of the flow remains as gross additions to 
11  stock (GAS) within the receiving industry activity as e.g. small repairs or hand tools, and which part is 
12  contained in the industries product output (Figure 3: 3).12  
13  Other than that exception, both MIOTs and dMFA can have an aligned system definition regarding 
14  products when the definitions of product groups match, or if the dMFA products are simply a (partial) 
15  aggregation of the MIOT products. If a MIOT-product is delivered to final demand and matches the 
16  dMFA-product definition, the dMFA-coherent tracing of material flows into products with MIOTs is 
17  feasible. However, two cases of mismatch can occur: 
18  •  (1) The material flow in MIOTs is routed into the ‘wrong’ product group as it is delivered to final 
19  demand early and does not reach the matching dMFA product/sector (Figure 3: 4): for example, a 
20  boiler is delivered to final demand as investment (GFCF) and is thus identified as end-use category 
21  ‘machinery’. In contrast, in dMFA, we might want to account the boiler as part of the end-use 
22  ‘buildings’. However, the flows to trace the boiler from GFCF into ‘buildings’ are not present in 
23  standard MIOTs.  
24  •  (2) The material flow in MIOTs is propagated too far downstream and skips the matching dMFA 
25  product/sector  classification  (Figure  3:  5):  for  example  when  ‘construction  machinery’  is  an 
 
12 Following SNA definitions, one would however expect that the majority of flows in intermediate demand are either used up or transformed and contained in 
a sectors output . Yokoi et al.  (2018) documented an attempt to tackle this problem (see section 2.2):  by referring to the Japanese MIOT definition of fixed 
capital assets in final demand (unit price >100,000 Yen and durability of over one year), the authors used the purchaser unit prices for products to identify the 
transactions not meeting these criteria and labeled them as accumulating within sectors of intermediate demand. For accumulations in intermediate demand, 
one cannot always be sure in which product the flow ends up, thus corresponding to an activity perspective (e.g. cement as GAS to agricultural industry). 
19 
 

1  intermediate input to ‘building construction’, the MIOT approach would identify the latter sector 
2  as end-use category. This categorization of ‘construction machinery’ corresponds rather to an 
3  activity (construction) than a product (machinery). For the intended accounting as product, the 
4  items would need to be delivered to final instead of intermediate demand. 
5  Some products, for example packaging, are always identified as MIOT intermediate use and thus 
6  systematically propagated too far downstream compared to dMFA categories. These products will 
7  never show up as distinct end-use in any MIOT-based method that defines end-use according to 
8  the product transactions to final demand (also see section 3.2, point (3)).  
9  For detailed MIOTs with suitable product labels (e.g. ‘boiler’), these issues can in theory be identified 
10  by tracing individual supply-chain steps. However, this gets more difficult, the more aggregated the 
11  product groups (e.g. ‘heating equipment’ can be both an input to a building or purchase by consumer).  
12  Additional problems emerge as MIOTs follow an economic and not a biophysical logic. For instance, 
13  product transactions are accounted for in either intermediate or final demand, depending on the type 
14  of use: if a product is purchased for final consumption or investment, the product transaction is 
15  reported in final demand and thus classified as end-use product (e.g. a boiler purchased by a private 
16  household); if a product is purchased by a third party to install the product in mandate of a final 
17  consumer/investor, the transaction might be accounted for in intermediate demand (e.g. a boiler 
18  purchased  by  a  plumber  (part  of  a  service  sector)  for  installation  in  the  private  household  (E. 
19  Kolleritsch & Statistik Austria, personal communication, June 30, 2022)). In the second case, the end-
20  use of materials in the boiler would be classified according to the label of the respective plumbing 
21  service sector. Additionally, ownership changes of already existing fixed assets might be accounted 
22  for in GFCF, which were produced from material consumption in an earlier and not the present year 
23  (United Nations, 2009: 10.38/39). 
24  In summary, while the System of National Accounts provides an overarching systematic, in practice, 
25  the concrete implementation of the mentioned points in national accounting might vary substantially 
26  (e.g. United Nations, 2009: 1.51/53). This might introduce unsystematic differences into MIOTs, which 
27  complicates the formulation of a generalized matching to dMFA system boundaries, leaving some 
28  remaining mismatches untackled by the MIOT-based methods reviewed herein. 
29  3.2 Comparison of MIOT-based methods and their strengths and weaknesses 
30  The four methods to distinguish material end-use shares from MIOTs presented in section 2.2 are 
31  different in two ways: they make use of different input-output (IO) models, and they apply different 
32  kinds of data manipulation to original MIOTs. These differences raise the question of how strongly 
33  these two elements influence end-use results. Table 2 summarizes differences between methods and 
20 
 

1  the following text elaborates on these (roman letters in the text below refer to row identifiers in Table 
2  2). 
3  Table 2: MIOT-based methods for deriving the end-use share matrix D and their characteristics. For literature studies that 
4  apply the four methods please see Table 1 and section 2.2. Dark orange x = criterion applies, light orange p = criterion can 
5  potentially be applied, but few studies do (see Table 1). 
Attributes/method  WIO-MFA  CBA  Ghosh-IO AMC  Partial Ghosh-IO 
(I) Use intermediate demand only (Z)        yes 
(II) Use intermediate & final demand (Z,Y)  yes  yes  yes   
(III) Materials external to industry supply 
yes    yes   
chain wide tracing* (no p->m flows)⊗ 
(IV) Yield filter**  yes       
(V) Mass filter (≠ non-physical)***  yes       
(VI)  Exclude  ‘materials’  from  final 
    yes  yes 
demand*** (sector demand set to zero) 
(VII) Use vs. supply-extension*  potentially 
(VIII) Transaction specific prices**  potentially 
(IX) Investment matrix***                                                        potentially   
 
Underlying input-output modelǂ  Ghosh quantity + market  Ghosh quantity (partially) 
Leontief price  Leontief quantity 
balance 
Advantages  • Mass-balanced  • Applicable with little 
• Time-efficient 
MFA logic  • Introduction of  IOA knowledge 
application (no filter 
excluding waste  processing degrees  • Products that are 
matrices required) 
and service flows  intermediate demand 
  in MIOTs can easily be 
• Simultaneous sector output to both intermediate and final demand  defined as end-use (e.g. 
• Convenient handling of imports/export in final demand  packaging) 
Challenges/disadvantages  • Assumptions for 
processing  • Only uses information 
degrees and  in inter-industry 
• Dependent on definition 
filters (deleting  • Footprints  transaction matrix 
of ‘products’: footprints 
data)  (‘embodied  • Assumptions on cutting 
(‘embodied perspective’) 
• Complexity as  perspective’) =  the supply-chain by 
= misallocations 
entry threshold  misallocations  defining intermediate 
for MFA  and end-use products 
practitioners  • Imports/export not 
automatically 
• ‘Functionality’ of product outputs that in MFA logic are end-uses (=final  considered 
demand), but are intermediate demand in MIOTs is lost (e.g. packaging) 
• MIOT system boundaries of intermediate demand challenge application to material flows (section 3.1) 
• Assumptions on price homogeneity & physical-monetary proportionality (if no transaction specific prices) 
• Domestic technology assumption for single-region MIOTs 
6 
Comments: can also be considered as change of *the input-side system boundaries of the industry system (partitioning the A matrix for WIO-MFA and Ghosh-
7 
IO AMC, or using different kind of satellites assigned to different MIOT sectors), **the inter-industry system boundaries, *** the output-side system boundaries 
8 
(either cut off where physical flows end and service flows start, or applying different vectors of final demand); ǂsee supplementary information 1b for further 
9 
explanation; ⊗ no reverse flows of products (p) to materials (m) – see section 2.2.1 for details 
10  The most prominent distinction of the four methods can be drawn between CBA, WIO-MFA and 
11  Ghosh-IO AMC, which use full input-output models corresponding to either the input-output market 
12  or industry balance; and the Partial Ghosh-IO which only uses the MIOT inter-industry matrix 𝐙 and 
13  represents a partial IO-model not fulfilling any IO-balance (see I-II Table 2; SI 1b). Within the first group, 
14  the individual methods of CBA, WIO-MFA and Ghosh-IO AMC in turn, correspond to fundamentally 
15  different underlying IO-models: the Leontief quantity (CBA), Leontief price (WIO-MFA) and Ghosh 
16  quantity (Ghosh-IO AMC) model (for detailed explanation see SI 1b). Despite these different models, 
17  the three methods yield the exact same end-use share matrix 𝐃, if applied at scale, i.e. to fully 
21 
 

| Attributes/method                           | WIO-MFA                                                                                                    | None        | None   | CBA                    | None   | None   | Ghosh-IO AMC              | None   | None   | Partial Ghosh-IO           | None   | None   |
|:--------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------|:-------|:-----------------------|:-------|:-------|:--------------------------|:-------|:-------|:---------------------------|:-------|:-------|
| (I) Use intermediate demand only (Z)        |                                                                                                            |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            | yes    |        |
| (II) Use intermediate & final demand (Z,Y)  |                                                                                                            | yes         |        |                        | yes    |        |                           | yes    |        |                            |        |        |
| (III) Materials external to industry supply | yes                                                                                                        |             |        |                        |        |        | yes                       |        |        |                            |        |        |
| chain wide tracing* (no p->m flows)⊗        |                                                                                                            |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |
| (IV) Yield filter**                         |                                                                                                            | yes         |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |
| (V) Mass filter (≠ non-physical)***         |                                                                                                            | yes         |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |
| (VI) Exclude ‘materials’ from final         |                                                                                                            |             |        |                        |        |        | yes                       |        |        | yes                        |        |        |
| demand*** (sector demand set to zero)       |                                                                                                            |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |
| (VII) Use vs. supply-extension*             |                                                                                                            | potentially |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |
| (VIII) Transaction specific prices**        |                                                                                                            | potentially |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |
| (IX) Investment matrix***                   |                                                                                                            | potentially |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |
| Underlying input-output modelǂ              | Leontief price                                                                                             |             |        | Leontief quantity      |        |        | Ghosh quantity + market   |        |        | Ghosh quantity (partially) |        |        |
|                                             |                                                                                                            |             |        |                        |        |        | balance                   |        |        |                            |        |        |
| Advantages                                  | • Mass-balanced                                                                                            |             |        | • Time-efficient       |        |        | • Introduction of         |        |        | • Applicable with little   |        |        |
|                                             | MFA logic                                                                                                  |             |        | application (no filter |        |        | processing degrees        |        |        | IOA knowledge              |        |        |
|                                             | excluding waste                                                                                            |             |        | matrices required)     |        |        |                           |        |        | • Products that are        |        |        |
|                                             | and service flows                                                                                          |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        | intermediate demand        |        |        |
|                                             |                                                                                                            |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        | in MIOTs can easily be     |        |        |
|                                             |                                                                                                            |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        | defined as end-use (e.g.   |        |        |
|                                             |                                                                                                            |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        | packaging)                 |        |        |
|                                             | • Simultaneous sector output to both intermediate and final demand                                         |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |
|                                             | • Convenient handling of imports/export in final demand                                                    |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |
| Challenges/disadvantages                    | • Assumptions for                                                                                          |             |        | • Footprints           |        |        | • Dependent on definition |        |        | • Only uses information    |        |        |
|                                             | processing                                                                                                 |             |        | (‘embodied             |        |        | of ‘products’: footprints |        |        | in inter-industry          |        |        |
|                                             | degrees and                                                                                                |             |        | perspective’) =        |        |        | (‘embodied perspective’)  |        |        | transaction matrix         |        |        |
|                                             | filters (deleting                                                                                          |             |        | misallocations         |        |        | = misallocations          |        |        | • Assumptions on cutting   |        |        |
|                                             | data)                                                                                                      |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        | the supply-chain by        |        |        |
|                                             | • Complexity as                                                                                            |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        | defining intermediate      |        |        |
|                                             | entry threshold                                                                                            |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        | and end-use products       |        |        |
|                                             | for MFA                                                                                                    |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        | • Imports/export not       |        |        |
|                                             | practitioners                                                                                              |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        | automatically              |        |        |
|                                             |                                                                                                            |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        | considered                 |        |        |
|                                             | • ‘Functionality’ of product outputs that in MFA logic are end-uses (=final                                |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |
|                                             | demand), but are intermediate demand in MIOTs is lost (e.g. packaging)                                     |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |
|                                             | • MIOT system boundaries of intermediate demand challenge application to material flows (section 3.1)      |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |
|                                             | • Assumptions on price homogeneity & physical-monetary proportionality (if no transaction specific prices) |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |
|                                             | • Domestic technology assumption for single-region MIOTs                                                   |             |        |                        |        |        |                           |        |        |                            |        |        |

1  quantified MIOT systems, and with no or equivalent manipulation of MIOT data as specified in Table 
2  2 III-IX (for proof see sections 6 and 7 of SI 1b). Discrepancies between the end-use shares 𝐃 of CBA, 
3  WIO-MFA and Ghosh-IO AMC can thus be attributed solely to the differences in manipulation of MIOT 
4  data, like the mass-filtering of flows.  
5  Below, we discuss the differences and similarities that arise from (non)-manipulation of monetary data 
6  for all four MIOT-based methods identified from literature: 
7  (1)  First, the reviewed methods apply different definitions of material end-uses (or in AMC language: 
8  the absorbing state). While for Partial Ghosh-IO the practitioner defines the absorbing state by 
9  selecting products in the inter-industry matrix (Aryapratama & Pauliuk, 2019; Cao, Shen, Liu, et al., 
10  2017), all other methods refer to the final demand matrix/vector from MIOTs.  
11  For Partial Ghosh-IO, the transition of intermediate products to an absorbing, end-use state is not 
12  dependent on values in the matrix of final demand, but selected products in intermediate demand 
13  are assumed to directly reflect end-use and 100% of related materials being delivered to this 
14  category (see section 2.2). For MIOTs with high product resolution, products might be identifiable 
15  as either intermediate or end-use. However, most often MIOT products represent a product mix, 
16  which is supplied to both intermediate and final demand (e.g. electric machinery as input to the 
17  automotive industry and investment in a fixed asset). Thus, if misclassification occurs, the supply-
18  chain is either artificially elongated (misclassified as intermediate use) and all material distributed 
19  downstream, or cut off (misclassified as end-use) and all material considered as end-use. Thereby, 
20  this method is particularly sensitive to a practitioner’s decision.13 
21  All remaining methods make use of final demand data to define the share of the absorbing states 
22  in  total  industry  output.  In  MIOTs,  final  demand  consists  of  different  categories,  including 
23  ‘consumption’  and  ‘gross  fixed  capital  formation’  (GFCF,  see  Figure  2).  For  GFCF,  the  "asset 
24  boundary for fixed assets consists of goods and services that are used in production for more than 
25  one year“ (United Nations, 2009: 10.33) and thus matches with the definition of material stocks 
26  in  dMFA  research  (Fischer-Kowalski  et  al.,  2011).  Expenditures  on  consumer  durables  (e.g. 
27  washing machines and small tools) are accounted for under consumption expenditures. Some 
28  expenditure on goods (e.g., a car) might be defined as either GFCF or another category of final 
29  demand, depending on whether they are for private or commercial use (United Nations, 2009: 
30  10.34, 10.35, 10.41).  
 
13 In support of their categorization of intermediate and end-use products, Aryapratama and Pauliuk  ((2019)) take the ratio of intermediate versus final demand, 
thus somewhat reducing this bias. The exclusion of final demand in Partial Ghosh-IO also impedes the method-immanent inclusion of imports and exports of 
final end-use products (which are reported in the final demand matrix). 
22 
 

1  Different studies use varying categories of final demand as absorbing state, the use of a particular 
2  sort of these data not tied to one particular of the methods reviewed herein. Most of the reviewed 
3  studies use the sum of all final demand accounts from MIOTs as absorbing state, while some only 
4  use data on GFCF, sometimes from sources other than MIOTs (W.-Q. Chen, 2017; W.-Q. Chen & 
5  Graedel, 2015). Kondo et al. (2012) and Yokoi et al. (2022) use a breakdown of GFCF into the 
6  ‘investment matrix’ (Pauliuk et al., 2015), which not only distinguishes investments into products 
7  but also the industry sector where the investment occurs, thus allowing conclusion about which 
8  industry uses the end-use products (Table 2 IX, see SI 1a).14 Additionally, GFCF endogenization was 
9  discussed in literature, however, it is unsuited for calculation of end-use shares (see footnote 8 
10  and section 2.2.2). 
11  From above definitions, we see that only using GFCF neglects material stocks accumulating in 
12  ‘consumption’ of households and governments (might depend on national GFCF definitions). In 
13  summary, we propose that, when determining the end-uses within a region, all final demand 
14  accounts referring to use within the respective region and time should be used, i.e. including 
15  accounts for both ‘consumption’ and GFCF, while excluding accounts for exports and inventory 
16  changes.15  
17   
18  (2)  Second, some methods calculate embodied materials (‘raw material equivalents’ or ‘material 
19  footprints’), while others aim to track material flows at their actual mass by following dMFA 
20  principles.  Consumption-based  accounting  (CBA)  calculates  material  footprints  by  assigning 
21  material use to MIOT-sectors and linking them to final demand through monetary inter-sectoral 
22  transactions that are  partially also non-physical and waste (e.g. service-flows and processing 
23  waste, see section 2.2). When accounting for material end-use shares, however, one is interested 
24  in a final product’s actual mass. Thus, following a mass-balanced MFA perspective like WIO-MFA, 
25  through  locating  resources/materials  outside  of  the  industry  system  (III),  as  well  as  the 
26  introduction of mass and yield filters (IV-V), is superior to CBA.16 This applies in particular, if 
27  supply-extensions of raw materials are used instead of use-extensions of engineering materials 
28  (VII; Owen et al., 2017; Wieland et al., 2020). The two Ghosh model methods can calculate either 
29  footprints or actual mass, depending on the definition of materials and products (e.g. service 
 
14 However, despite few data sources like EU KLEMS (O’Mahony and Timmer (2009)), data on investment matrices is scarce, low in resolution, and lacking details 
on investments for buildup & maintenance vs. demolishment (Pauliuk et al. (2015); C.-J. Södersten et al. (2020)). 
15 Also the use of all compartments of MIOT final demand might cause problems: Nakamura et al.  (2014) describe that through the vector of exports and 
inventory changes, also intermediate products are reported in final demand. The authors use a type of output coefficient matrix of the Ghosh model (similar to 
equation 10) to allocate deliveries of intermediate to final products in a secondary calculation. To avoid the same problem for ‘materials’, the Ghosh-IO AMC 
method prohibits flows of materials to final demand by partitioning the latter (VI, Equation 7).  
16 Nakamura et al.  (2009) compared the material mass of iron, aluminum and polyvinyl chloride in a Japanese passenger car for the year 2000 via CBA and WIO-
MFA with data from JAMA  (2003) for 1997/2001. They found that CBA overestimated material content by 18-47% while WIO-MFA was fairly close to JAMA data 
 
(2-6% deviation).
23 
 

1  transactions included as ‘products’ or not) and application of filter matrices (not mentioned in the 
2  original studies). 
3  However, also the methods that aim to track actual mass come with their own challenges in 
4  manipulating  MIOT  data  (see  Equations  2,  7  and  11).  When  defining  different  degrees  of 
5  fabrication, e.g. materials, intermediate and consumption products, as well as filter matrices that 
6  exclude non-physical and waste flows (WIO-MFA), monetary transactions need to be deleted from 
7  the MIOT, which influences the resulting end-use shares. The definition of filter matrices requires 
8  expert knowledge and is to some degree up to assumptions (e.g. when is a transaction non-
9  physical).  Specifically,  the  decision  on  excluding  transactions  with  service  sectors  (see 
10  compartment  in  Figure  2),  i.e.,  whether  to  only  filter  service  sector  outputs  (non-physical 
11  assumption likely) or also service-sector inputs (non-physical assumption precarious), can give 
12  wrong results, for example, when large material flows to service sectors like repair are ignored 
13  (Streeck et al., in revision_). Additionally, filter matrix compilation can be tedious and filters are 
14  hardly available in published works, which complicates comparing different studies. Making these 
15  filters available through more transparent publication would benefit re-use, open and cumulative 
16  science.   
17   
18  (3)  Third, the MIOT system boundaries present a challenge for tracking material use to particular end-
19  use products. The functionality of products that are end-use products in the sense of dMFA, but 
20  are intermediate products in the definition of MIOTs (e.g. packaging), is lost during the calculation 
21  of  the  Ghosh/Leontief  inverse  (e.g.  plastic  in  computer  packaging  identified  as  plastic  in  a 
22  computer; see section 2.1.1 in Streeck et al. (in revision_)). This problem applies to all reviewed 
23  methods except for the Partial Ghosh-IO, where end-uses are defined by the practitioner (see 
24  point (1) above). 
25  In theory, the correct end-use can be re-identified via secondary calculations. Nakamura et al. 
26  (2007), Yokoi et al. (2018: section 2.1.4), Dietzenbacher et al. (2019) and Hertwich (2021) propose 
27  distinct methods to calculate materials in a final product’s sub-components (e.g. to determine 
28  product packaging). However, to our knowledge none of these methods is capable of doing that 
29  without facing issues of double counting. Nakamura et al. (2007) propose an approach similar to 
30  production layer decomposition (Wieland et al., 2018) for WIO-MFA, in which supply chain layers 
31  are decomposed one supply chain step at a time. Dietzenbacher et al. (2019) and Hertwich (2021) 
32  propose different variations of the Hypothetical Extraction Method (HEM) to the Leontief quantity 
33  model, in which the effect of one product/sector is evaluated by comparing a counterfactual in 
34  which  this  sector  is  removed  from  the  unperturbed  system.  Yokoi  et  al.  (2018)  propose  an 
24 
 

1  approach similar to HEM for WIO-MFA. However, unless the inter-industry matrix is perfectly 
2  directional  (triangular,  which  requires  assumptions,  Nakamura  et  al.,  2007),  all  of  these 
3  approaches lead to double counting if one subsequently wants to decompose into individual 
4  sectors/products. Hertwich (2021) corrected for double counting in a downstream step through 
5  identifying  the  amount  of  environmental  burden  that  is  allocated  more  than  once,  using  a 
6  decomposition  approach  inspired  by  footprint  studies  that  aim  to  resolve,  i.e.  avoid,  double 
7  counting in footprints (Cabernard et al., 2019; Dente et al., 2018). In theory, above methods could 
8  be applied to re-identify end-use functionality for selected products, do however exclude certain 
9  sector interactions to avoid double-counting. Further developing these methods towards tracing 
10  material flows into sub-components of end-use products without exclusion of sector interactions, 
11  thus yielding a three dimensional array version of the end-use share matrix 𝐃, would be an 
12  interesting next step. In the empirical part II of this review (Streeck et al., in revision_), we take a 
13  pragmatic stance and propose a simple method to re-define selected intermediate products such 
14  as packaging as end-use. We achieve this by altering the system boundaries of the MIOT industry 
15  system towards the output-side and call the approach ‘End-Use Transfer’. 
16   
17  (4)  Fourth,  most  of  the  studies  that  used  above  methods  suffer  from  the  price  homogeneity 
18  assumption inherent to MIOTs, which assumes that the individual products contained in the 
19  aggregate product mix delivered by a sector have the same unit price (Weisz & Duchin, 2006). This 
20  introduces bias, when prices of individual products in the mix differ substantially (see footnote 
21  four for potential reasons). In the studies of W.-Q. Chen and Graedel (2015) and W.-Q. Chen (2017) 
22  on aluminum products in the USA, that does not seem to be a large issue, as supposed by the good 
23  fit of WIO-MFA results with results of other estimation methods. However for materials like steel, 
24  which strongly differ in quality and price (e.g. for automotive versus construction steel), this might 
25  be  more  important.17 Principally  there  are  two  ways  to  tackle  above  assumption:  first  by 
26  disaggregating sectors in the MIOT (e.g. Nakajima et al., 2013; Ohno et al., 2015); and second  by 
27  using transaction-specific prices (Table 2: VIII) for the output of sector i to different sectors j. The 
28  latter was done in Yokoi et al. (2018, 2022), which are the only studies we found that applied this 
29  approach.  However,  the  scarcity  of  price  data  for  different  material  applications,  which 
30  additionally matches the product average assumed for MIOT’s sector output product mixes, are 
31  major limitations for wider application. 
32   
 
17 For example, high value steel alloys have a high value but relatively low mass flow and hence, the estimation of end-use shares with a monetary table will 
overestimate the physical end-use share of sectors that consume a lot of high value steel alloys. This problem becomes smaller if sectors are more disaggregated 
 
and less price inhomogeneity occurs.
25 
 

1  (5)  Fifth, the reviewed methods differ regarding ease of use and required Input-Output Analysis (IOA) 
2  proficiency. Partial Ghosh-IO can be implemented without detailed knowledge of IAO (like done 
3  in Aryapratama & Pauliuk, 2019; Cao, Shen, Liu, et al., 2017), however this method is very sensitive 
4  to  practitioner  decisions  (see  point  (1)  above).  All  other  methods  require  at  least  basic  IOA 
5  operations. From these, CBA is the easiest and most efficient method to apply, but is problematic 
6  for calculating end-uses due to its consumption-based footprint perspective. WIO-MFA closely 
7  follows  a  physical  dMFA  logic,  but  is  comparatively  complex  and  data-intensive,  which  can 
8  represent an entry barrier. However, this point might partially be resolved by making available 
9  WIO-MFA filter matrices and underlying code scripts via platforms like Zenodo and Github. 
10  There are several additional points to consider when applying the different methods, like choosing the 
11  MIOT sectors corresponding to ‘materials’, the exact design of filter matrices and so on, which will be 
12  discussed  in  the  comparative  application  of  methods  in  part  II  of  this  review  (Streeck  et  al.  (in 
13  revision_)). 
4. Conclusions and next steps  
14 
15  The use of monetary input-output tables (MIOTs) to derive end-use shares can help overcome limited 
16  data availability in physical units. The reviewed methods can be applied to any MIOT, for which the 
17  widely used Waste Input-Output approach to (d)MFA theoretically leads to the most accurate end-
18  use shares by applying corrections to align MIOTs with dMFA system boundaries. We showed that 
19  improvements in accuracy of end-use shares arise from the alignment of system boundaries between 
20  MIOTs and dMFA, and not from different underlying input-output models (section 3.2). 
21  Beyond theoretical considerations, we see the need to empirically compare end-use shares derived 
22  from  MRIOs,  national  MIOTs  and  physical  unit  industry  shipments,  to  assess  the  accuracy  and 
23  robustness of results from these data sources. To that end, in part II of this review, we apply the 
24  methods presented here to investigate and improve upon the theoretical drawbacks (Streeck et al., in 
25  revision_). In addition, the wide use of end-use shares in dMFA warrants further comparison and 
26  validation efforts with independently obtained estimates, e.g. from bottom-up dMFA. 
27  This review described some of the potentials and drawbacks that come with using monetary proxy 
28  data to model physical flows. To enable more accurate assessment of production and consumption, 
29  resource efficiency, the circular economy, or integrated modeling of monetary and physical capital, 
30  we require a political process that pushes stakeholders and statistical agencies to compile more 
31  information on material end-uses in physical units, and to make these data publicly available. Ideally, 
32  such  a  process  would  enable  the  compilation  of  purely  physical  IOTs,  independent  accounts  of 
26 
 

1  materials in product stocks, and their integration with dMFA to comprehensively represent the stocks 
2  and flows of the biophysical basis of society, including information on end-use products. 
Acknowledgements  
3 
4  We thank André Baumgart for his help in initial appraisal of literature and three anonymous reviewers 
5  for their constructive and helpful comments. 
Funding Information 
6 
7  The work of J.S. and D.W. was supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European 
8  Union’s  Horizon  2020  research  and  innovative programme (MAT_STOCKS,  grant  agreement  No 
9  741950) and by the European Union's Horizon Europe programme (CircEUlar, grant agreement No 
10  101056810). The  work  of  J.S.  was  furthermore  supported  by  the  Austrian  Federal  Ministry  of 
11  Education, Science and Research (Marietta Blau Grant MPC-2021-00143). The work of H.W. was 
12  funded by the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research 
 
13  and innovation programme (FINEPRINT project,  grant agreement No. 725525). 
Conflict of Interest Statement  
14 
15  The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
Data Availability Statement 
16 
17  The data that supports the findings of this study are available in the supporting information of this 
18  article.  
CRediT author statement 
19 
20  JS: Conceptualization, Investigation, Formal analysis, Visualization, Writing – Original Draft, Review & 
21  Editing, SP: Formal analysis, Supervision, Writing – Original Draft, Review & Editing, HW: Supervision, 
22  Writing - Review & Editing, DW: Conceptualization, Supervision, Writing - Review & Editing, Project 
23  administration 
Supporting information 
24 
25  Supporting information is linked to this article on the JIE website:  
26  Supporting information SI 1: This supporting information provides potential additional configurations 
27  of methods to trace material flows into products, using monetary input-output tables (MIOTs) in SI 1a; 
27 
 

1  as well as seminal documentation of methods, including formal proof of equivalence of underlying 
2  input-output models in SI 1b. 
3  Supporting information SI 2: This supporting information provides examples corresponding to the 
4  documentation of methods' underlying input-output models in SI 1b. 
References 
5 
6  Abd Rahman, M. D., Los, B., Owen, A., & Lenzen, M. (2021). Multi-level comparisons of input–output 
7  tables  using  cross-entropy  indicators.  Economic  Systems  Research,  1–20. 
8  https://doi.org/10.1080/09535314.2021.1990869 
9  Aguilar‐Hernandez, G. A.,  Deetman, S.,  Merciai, S.,  Rodrigues, J. F. D.,  &  Tukker, A.  (2021).  Global 
10  distribution of material inflows to in‐use stocks in 2011 and its implications for a circularity 
11  transition. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 151(14), 104452. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.13179 
12  AISI. (1941-2005). Annual statistical report of the American Iron and Steel Institute. American Iron and 
13  Steel Institute.  
14  AISI. (1960-2006). Annual Statistical Report. American Iron and Steel Institute.  
15  The  Aluminum  Association.  (2009).  Aluminum  Statistical  Review  for  2008. 
16  https://www.aluminum.org/sites/default/files/Aluminum%20Statistical%20Review%20Samp
17  le.pdf 
18  Aryapratama, R.,  &  Pauliuk, S.  (2019).  Estimating  in-use  wood-based  materials  carbon  stocks  in 
19  Indonesia:  Towards  a  contribution  to  the  national  climate  mitigation  effort.  Resources, 
20  Conservation and Recycling, 149, 301–311. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.06.010 
21  Ayres, R. U., Ayres, L., & Råde, I. (2003). The life cycle of copper, its co-products and byproducts. Kluwer 
22  Academic.  
23  Black, K. H., & Lyman, W. S. (1990). The flow of copper to US markets. Copper 90 Refining Fabrications 
24  Markets. 
25  Bouwmeester, M. C.,  &  Oosterhaven, J.  (2013).  Specification  and  Aggregation  Errors  in 
26  Environmentally Extended Input–Output Models. Environmental and Resource Economics, 
27  56(3), 307–335. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10640-013-9649-8 
28  Bullard, C. W., & Herendeen, R. A. (1975). The energy cost of goods and services. Energy Policy, 3(4), 
29  268–278. https://doi.org/10.1016/0301-4215(75)90035-X 
30  Cabernard, L., Pfister, S., & Hellweg, S. (2019). A new method for analyzing sustainability performance 
31  of global supply chains and its application to material resources. The Science of the Total 
32  Environment, 684, 164–177. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2019.04.434 
28 
 

1  Cao, Z., Shen, L., Liu, L., Zhao, J., Zhong, S., Kong, H., & Sun, Y. (2017). Estimating the in-use cement 
2  stock  in  China:  1920–2013.  Resources,  Conservation  and  Recycling,  122,  21–31. 
3  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.01.021 
4  Cao, Z., Shen, L., Løvik, A. N., Müller, D. B [Daniel B.], & Liu, G. (2017). Elaborating the History of Our 
5  Cementing  Societies:  An  in-Use  Stock  Perspective.  Environmental  Science  &  Technology, 
6  51(19), 11468–11475. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b03077 
7  Carmona, L., Whiting, K., Carrasco, A., Sousa, T., & Domingos, T. (2017). Material Services with Both 
8  Eyes Wide Open. Sustainability, 9(9), 1508. https://doi.org/10.3390/su9091508 
9  Carmona, L. G., Whiting, K., Haberl, H., & Sousa, T. (2021). The use of steel in the United Kingdom's 
10  transport sector: A stock–flow–service nexus case study. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 25(1), 
11  125–143. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.13055 
12  CDA. (1980). Annual Data. Copper Supply and Consumption, 1960–1979.  
13  CDA. (2020). Copper Development Association Inc. Annual Data 2020: Copper Supply & Consumption 
14  —  1999–2019.  https://www.copper.org/resources/market_data/pdfs/annual-data-book-
15  2020_final.pdf 
16  Chen, W.‑Q., & Graedel, T. E [T. E.] (2015). Improved alternatives for estimating in-use material stocks. 
17  Environmental Science & Technology, 49(5), 3048–3055. https://doi.org/10.1021/es504353s 
18  Chen, W.‑Q., Graedel, T. E [T. E.], Nuss, P., & Ohno, H. (2016). Building the Material Flow Networks of 
19  Aluminum in the 2007 U.S. Economy. Environmental Science & Technology, 50(7), 3905–3912. 
20  https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b05095 
21  Chen, W.‑Q. (2017). Dynamic Product‐Level Analysis of In‐Use Aluminum Stocks in the United States. 
22  Journal of Industrial Ecology, 22(6), 1425–1435. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12710 
23  Clark, W. C.,  &  Harley, A. G.  (2020).  Sustainability  Science:  Toward  a  Synthesis.  Annual  Review  of 
24  Environment  and  Resources,  45(1),  331–386.  https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-environ-
25  012420-043621 
26  CSRE. (2008). Chinese Rare Earth Yearbook 2008 (in Chinese).  
27  Cullen, J. M.,  Allwood, J. M.,  &  Bambach, M. D.  (2012).  Mapping  the  global  flow  of  steel:  From 
28  steelmaking to end-use goods. Environmental Science & Technology, 46(24), 13048–13055. 
29  https://doi.org/10.1021/es302433p 
30  Dahlström, K., Ekins, P., He, J., Davis, J., & Clift, R. (2004). Iron, Steel and Aluminium in the UK: Material 
31  Flows  and  their  Economic  Dimensions. 
32  https://www.surrey.ac.uk/ces/files/pdf/0304_WP_Biffaward_Steel_Al-Final.pdf  
33  Daigo, I.,  Igarashi, Y.,  Matsuno, Y.,  &  Adachi, Y.  (2007).  Accounting  for  Steel  Stock  in  Japan.  ISIJ 
34  International, 47(7), 1065–1069. https://doi.org/10.2355/isijinternational.47.1065 
29 
 

1  Dente, S. M., Aoki-Suzuki, C., Tanaka, D., & Hashimoto, S. (2018). Revealing the life cycle greenhouse 
2  gas emissions of materials: The Japanese case. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 133, 
3  395–403. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.12.011 
4  Dietzenbacher, E., van Burken, B., & Kondo, Y [Yasushi] (2019). Hypothetical extractions from a global 
5  perspective.  Economic  Systems  Research,  31(4),  505–519. 
6  https://doi.org/10.1080/09535314.2018.1564135 
7  Dombi, M. (2018). Modeling the material stock of manufactured capital with production function. 
8  Resources,  Conservation  and  Recycling,  138,  207–214. 
9  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2018.07.015 
10  Dombi, M.,  Karcagi-Kováts, A.,  Tóth-Szita, K.,  &  Kuti, I.  (2018).  The  structure  of  socio-economic 
11  metabolism and its drivers on household level in Hungary. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
12  172(5), 758–767. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.10.220 
13  Du, X., & Graedel, T. E [T. E.] (2011). Global in-use stocks of the rare Earth elements: A first estimate. 
14  Environmental Science & Technology, 45(9), 4096–4101. https://doi.org/10.1021/es102836s 
15  Duchin, F., & Levine, S. H. (2010). Embodied Resource Flows and Product Flows. Journal of Industrial 
16  Ecology, 14(4), 586–597. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2010.00258.x 
17  Duchin, F., & Levine, S. H. (2013). Embodied Resource Flows in a Global Economy. Journal of Industrial 
18  Ecology, 17(1), 65–78. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2012.00498.x 
19  Eurostat. (2008). Eurostat Manual of Supply, Use and Input-Output Tables.  
20  Fischer-Kowalski, M.,  Krausmann, F  [F.],  Giljum, S  [S.],  Lutter, S  [S.],  Mayer, A.,  Bringezu, S., 
21  Moriguchi, Y [Y.], Schütz, H [H.], Schandl, H [H.], & Weisz, H [H.] (2011). Methodology and 
22  Indicators of Economy-wide Material Flow Accounting. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 15(6), 
23  855–876. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2011.00366.x 
24  Galli, A., Wiedmann, T., Ercin, E., Knoblauch, D., Ewing, B., & Giljum, S [Stefan] (2012).  Integrating 
25  Ecological, Carbon and Water footprint into a “Footprint Family” of indicators: Definition and 
26  role  in  tracking  human  pressure  on  the  planet.  Ecological  Indicators,  16(4),  100–112. 
27  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2011.06.017 
28  Geyer, R., Jambeck, J. R., & Law, K. L. (2017). Production, use, and fate of all plastics ever made. 
29  Science Advances, 3(7), e1700782. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1700782 
30  Glöser, S., Soulier, M., & Tercero Espinoza, L. A. (2013). Dynamic Analysis of Global Copper Flows. 
31  Global Stocks, Postconsumer Material Flows, Recycling Indicators, and Uncertainty Evaluation. 
32  Environmental Science & Technology, 47(12), 6564–6572. https://doi.org/10.1021/es400069b 
30 
 

1  Godoy León, M. F., Blengini, G. A., & Dewulf, J. (2020). Cobalt in end-of-life products in the EU, where 
2  does it end up? - The MaTrace approach. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 158, 104842. 
3  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.104842 
4  Haberl, H., Schmid, M., Haas, W., Wiedenhofer, D., Rau, H., & Winiwarter, V. (2021). Stocks, flows, 
5  services  and  practices:  Nexus  approaches  to  sustainable  social  metabolism.  Ecological 
6  Economics, 182, 106949. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2021.106949 
7  Haberl, H., Wiedenhofer, D., Erb, K.‑H., Görg, C., & Krausmann, F [Fridolin] (2017). The Material Stock–
8  Flow–Service Nexus: A New Approach for Tackling the Decoupling Conundrum. Sustainability, 
9  9(7), 1049. https://doi.org/10.3390/su9071049 
10  Haberl, H., Wiedenhofer, D., Pauliuk, S., Krausmann, F [Fridolin], Müller, D. B [Daniel B.], & Fischer-
11  Kowalski, M.  (2019).  Contributions  of  sociometabolic  research  to  sustainability  science. 
12  Nature Sustainability, 2(3), 173–184. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-019-0225-2 
13  Hammer  Strømman, A.,  &  Duchin, F.  (2006).  A  world  trade  model  with  bilateral  trade  based  on 
14  comparative  advantage.  Economic  Systems  Research,  18(3),  281–297. 
15  https://doi.org/10.1080/09535310600844300 
16  Hashimoto, S., Tanikawa, H., & Moriguchi, Y [Yuichi] (2007). Where will large amounts of materials 
17  accumulated within the economy go? – A material flow analysis of construction minerals for 
18  Japan.  Waste  Management,  27(12),  1725–1738. 
19  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2006.10.009 
20  Hatayama, H., Daigo, I., Matsuno, Y., & Adachi, Y. (2010). Outlook of the world steel cycle based on 
21  the  stock  and  flow  dynamics.  Environmental  Science  &  Technology,  44(16),  6457–6463. 
22  https://doi.org/10.1021/es100044n 
23  Helbig, C., Kondo, Y [Yasushi], & Nakamura, S [Shinichiro] (2022). Simultaneously tracing the fate of 
24  seven  metals  at  a  global  level  with  MaTrace‐multi.  Journal  of  Industrial  Ecology,  Article 
25  jiec.13219. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.13219 
26  Hertwich, E. G.  (2021).  Increased  carbon  footprint  of  materials  production  driven  by  rise  in 
27  investments. Nature Geoscience, 44, 1888. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-021-00690-8 
28  Inomata, S., & Owen, A. (2014). COMPARATIVE EVALUATION OF MRIO DATABASES. Economic Systems 
29  Research, 26(3), 239–244. https://doi.org/10.1080/09535314.2014.940856 
30  ISSB. (1979). Annual statistics for the United Kingdom. Iron and Steel Statistics Bureau.  
31  Jakobs, A.,  Schulte, S.,  &  Pauliuk, S.  (2021).  Price  Variance  in  Hybrid-LCA  Leads  to  Significant 
32  Uncertainty  in  Carbon  Footprints.  Frontiers  in  Sustainability,  2,  Article  666209,  517. 
33  https://doi.org/10.3389/frsus.2021.666209 
34  JAMA. (2003). The motor industry of Japan.  
31 
 

1  Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association (2000). Automotive Guidebook of Japan 2000–2001(47), 
2  221. 
3  Jarrín Jácome, G., Godoy León, M. F., Alvarenga, R. A. F., & Dewulf, J. (2021). Tracking the Fate of 
4  Aluminium  in  the  EU  Using  the  MaTrace  Model.  Resources,  10(7),  72. 
5  https://doi.org/10.3390/resources10070072 
6  Jiang, D., Chen, W.‑Q., Liu, W., & Chertow, M. (2017). Inter-Sectoral Bisphenol A (BPA) Flows in the 
7  2012  Chinese  Economy.  Environmental  Science  &  Technology,  51(15),  8654–8662. 
8  https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b01986 
9  JISEA. (1980-2005). Sekai Shuyoukoku Tekkou Handbook (Japanese): Japan Iron and Steel Exporters’ 
10  Association (1-9th). Japan Iron and Steel Federation.  
11  JISF.  (1971-2000).  Committee  of  Iron  and  Steel Statistics.:  Handbook  for  Iron and  Steel  Statistics 
12  (Japanese). Japan Iron and Steel Federation.  
13  JISF. (1971–2003). Handbook for Iron and Steel Statistics.  
14  JOGMEC. (2007). Mineral Resources: Material Flow: Rare Earths (in Japanese).  
15  Kalt, G., Wiedenhofer, D., Görg, C., & Haberl, H. (2019). Conceptualizing energy services: A review of 
16  energy and well-being along the Energy Service Cascade. Energy Research & Social Science, 53, 
17  47–58. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2019.02.026 
18  Kapur, A., Keoleian, G., Kendall, A., & Kesler, S. E. (2008). Dynamic Modeling of In-Use Cement Stocks 
19  in  the  United  States.  Journal  of  Industrial  Ecology,  12(4),  539–556. 
20  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2008.00055.x 
21  Kelly, T. D., & Matos, G. (2014). Historical statistics for mineral and material commodities in the United 
22  States  (2016  version):  U.S.  Geological  Survey  Data  Series  140. 
23  https://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/historical-statistics/ 
24  Klose, S., & Pauliuk, S. (2021). Quantifying longevity and circularity of copper for different resource 
25  efficiency policies at the material and product levels. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 25(4), 979–
26  993. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.13092 
27  Kondo, Y [Y.], Nakajima, K [K.], Matsubae, K [K.], & Nakamura, S [S.] (2012). The anatomy of capital 
28  stock : input-output material flow analysis (MFA) of the material composition of physical 
29  stocks  and  its  evolution  over  time.  Revue  De  Métallurgie,  109(5),  293–298. 
30  https://doi.org/10.1051/metal/2012022 
31  Krausmann, F [Fridolin], Schandl, H [Heinz], Eisenmenger, N., Giljum, S [Stefan], & Jackson, T. (2017). 
32  Material  Flow  Accounting:  Measuring  Global  Material  Use  for  Sustainable  Development. 
33  Annual  Review  of  Environment  and  Resources,  42(1),  647–675. 
34  https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-environ-102016-060726 
32 
 

1  Krausmann, F [Fridolin], Wiedenhofer, D., Lauk, C., Haas, W., Tanikawa, H., Fishman, T., Miatto, A., 
2  Schandl, H [Heinz], & Haberl, H. (2017). Global socioeconomic material stocks rise 23-fold over 
3  the  20th  century  and  require  half  of  annual  resource  use.  Proceedings  of  the  National 
4  Academy of Sciences, 114(8), 1880–1885. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1613773114 
5  Lanau, M., Liu, G., Kral, U., Wiedenhofer, D., Keijzer, E. E. E., Yu, C., & Ehlert, C. (2019). Taking stock of 
6  built environment stock studies: Progress and prospects. Environmental Science & Technology. 
7  Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b06652 
8  Lenzen, M. (2011). AGGREGATION VERSUS DISAGGREGATION IN INPUT–OUTPUT ANALYSIS OF THE 
9  ENVIRONMENT.  Economic  Systems  Research,  23(1),  73–89. 
10  https://doi.org/10.1080/09535314.2010.548793 
11  Lenzen, M.,  Geschke, A.,  West, J.,  Fry, J.,  Malik, A.,  Giljum, S  [Stefan],  Milà  i  Canals, L.,  Piñero, P., 
12  Lutter, S  [Stephan],  Wiedmann, T.,  Li, M.,  Sevenster, M.,  Potočnik, J.,  Teixeira, I.,  van 
13  Voore, M., Nansai, K., & Schandl, H [Heinz] (2021). Implementing the material footprint to 
14  measure progress towards Sustainable Development Goals 8 and 12. Nature Sustainability. 
15  Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-021-00811-6 
16  Lenzen, M., Moran, D., Kanemoto, K., & Geschke, A. (2013). Building Eora: A global multi-region input-
17  output database at high country and sector resolution. Economic Systems Research, 25(1), 20–
18  49. https://doi.org/10.1080/09535314.2013.769938 
19  Lenzen, M., Pade, L.‑L., & Munksgaard, J. (2004). CO 2 Multipliers in Multi-region Input-Output Models. 
20  Economic  Systems  Research,  16(4),  391–412. 
21  https://doi.org/10.1080/0953531042000304272 
22  Lenzen, M., & Treloar, G. J. (2005). Endogenising capital: a comparison of two methods. Journal of 
23  Applied Input-Output Analysis, 10. 
24  Liu, G., & Müller, D. B [Daniel B.] (2013). Centennial evolution of aluminum in-use stocks on our 
25  aluminized  planet.  Environmental  Science  &  Technology,  47(9),  4882–4888. 
26  https://doi.org/10.1021/es305108p 
27  Lutter, S [Stephan], Giljum, S [Stefan], & Luckeneder, S. (2019). An update of demand-based material 
28  flow data using the new OECD ICIO database and benchmarking with national data from 
29  selected countries. rganisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).  
30  Melo, M. T. (1999). Statistical analysis of metal scrap generation: the case of aluminium in Germany. 
31  Resources,  Conservation  and  Recycling,  26(2),  91–113.  https://doi.org/10.1016/S0921-
32  3449(98)00077-9 
33 
 

1  Merciai, S., & Schmidt, J. (2018). Methodology for the Construction of Global Multi-Regional Hybrid 
2  Supply and Use Tables for the EXIOBASE v3 Database. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 22(3), 516–
3  531. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12713 
4  MERI/J. (2003). Current trends in the Chinese rare earth industry (in Japanese).  
5  Metallgesellschaft and WBMS as cited in Melo 1999. Metal Statistics. 
6  Miatto, A., Schandl, H [Heinz], & Tanikawa, H. (2017). How important are realistic building lifespan 
7  assumptions for material stock and demolition waste accounts? Resources, Conservation and 
8  Recycling, 122, 143–154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.01.015 
9  Milford, R. L., Allwood, J. M., & Cullen, J. M. (2011). Assessing the potential of yield improvements, 
10  through process scrap reduction, for energy and CO2 abatement in the steel and aluminium 
11  sectors.  Resources,  Conservation  and  Recycling,  55(12),  1185–1195. 
12  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2011.05.021 
13  Miller, R. E.,  &  Blair, P. D.  (2009).  Input–Output  Analysis  (2nd  ed.).  Cambridge  University  Press. 
14  https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511626982 
15  Miller, T. R., Berrill, P., Wolfram, P., Wang, R., Kim, Y., Zheng, X., & Hertwich, E. G. (2019). Method for 
16  endogenizing  capital  in  the  United  States  Environmentally‐Extended  Input‐Output  model. 
17  Journal of Industrial Ecology, 23(6), 1410–1424. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12931 
18  Müller, D. B [D. B.], Wang, T [T.], Duval, B [B.], & Graedel, T. E [T. E.] (2006). Exploring the engine of 
19  anthropogenic iron cycles. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(44), 16111–
20  16116. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0603375103 
21  Müller, D. B [Daniel B.], Wang, T [Tao], & Duval, B [Benjamin] (2011). Patterns of Iron Use in Societal 
22  Evolution.  Environmental  Science  &  Technology,  45(1),  182–188. 
23  https://doi.org/10.1021/es102273t 
24  Müller, E., Hilty, L. M., Widmer, R., Schluep, M., & Faulstich, M. (2014). Modeling Metal Stocks and 
25  Flows:  A  Review  of  Dynamic  Material  Flow  Analysis  Methods.  Environmental  Science  & 
26  Technology, 48(4), 2102–2113. https://doi.org/10.1021/es403506a 
27  Nakajima, K  [Kenichi],  Ohno, H.,  Kondo, Y  [Yasushi],  Matsubae, K  [Kazuyo],  Takeda, O.,  Miki, T., 
28  Nakamura, S  [Shinichiro],  &  Nagasaka, T.  (2013).  Simultaneous  Material  Flow  Analysis  of 
29  Nickel, Chromium, and Molybdenum Used in Alloy Steel by Means of Input–Output Analysis. 
30  Environmental Science & Technology, 47(9), 4653–4660. https://doi.org/10.1021/es3043559 
31  Nakamura, S [Shinichiro], & Kondo, Y [Yasushi] (2002). Input-Output Analysis of Waste Management. 
32  Journal of Industrial Ecology, 6(1), 39–63. https://doi.org/10.1162/108819802320971632 
34 
 

1  Nakamura, S [Shinichiro], & Kondo, Y [Yasushi] (2018). Toward an integrated model of the circular 
2  economy: Dynamic waste input–output. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 139, 326–332. 
3  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2018.07.016 
4  Nakamura, S [Shinichiro], Kondo, Y [Yasushi], Kagawa, S., Matsubae, K [Kazuyo], Nakajima, K [Kenichi], 
5  & Nagasaka, T. (2014). Matrace: Tracing the fate of materials over time and across products 
6  in  open-loop  recycling.  Environmental  Science  &  Technology,  48(13),  7207–7214. 
7  https://doi.org/10.1021/es500820h 
8  Nakamura, S  [Shinichiro],  Kondo, Y  [Yasushi],  Matsubae, K  [Kazuyo],  Nakajima, K  [Kenichi],  & 
9  Nagasaka, T. (2011). Upiom: A new tool of MFA and its application to the flow of iron and steel 
10  associated  with  car  production.  Environmental  Science  &  Technology,  45(3),  1114–1120. 
11  https://doi.org/10.1021/es1024299 
12  Nakamura, S [Shinichiro], Kondo, Y [Yasushi], Nakajima, K [Kenichi], Ohno, H., & Pauliuk, S. (2017). 
13  Quantifying Recycling and Losses of Cr and Ni in Steel Throughout Multiple Life Cycles Using 
14  MaTrace-Alloy.  Environmental  Science  &  Technology,  51(17),  9469–9476. 
15  https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b01683 
16  Nakamura, S [Shinichiro], & Nakajima, K [Kenichi] (2005). Waste Input–Output Material Flow Analysis 
17  of  Metals  in  the  Japanese  Economy.  Materials  Transactions,  46,  2550–2553. 
18  https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/matertrans/46/12/46_12_2550/_pdf/-char/ja 
19  Nakamura, S [Shinichiro], Nakajima, K [Kenichi], Kondo, Y [Yasushi], & Nagasaka, T. (2007). The Waste 
20  Input-Output Approach to Materials Flow Analysis. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 11(4), 50–63. 
21  https://doi.org/10.1162/jiec.2007.1290 
22  Nakamura, S  [Shinichiro],  Nakajima, K  [Kenichi],  Yoshizawa, Y.,  Matsubae-Yokoyama, K.,  & 
23  Nagasaka, T. (2009). Analyzing Polyvinyl Chloride in Japan With the Waste Inputâ’Output 
24  Material  Flow  Analysis  Model.  Journal  of  Industrial  Ecology,  13(5),  706–717. 
25  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1530-9290.2009.00153.x 
26  Nakatani, J., Maruyama, T., & Moriguchi, Y [Yuichi] (2020). Revealing the intersectoral material flow 
27  of plastic containers and packaging in Japan. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
28  of  the  United  States  of  America,  117(33),  19844–19853. 
29  https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2001379117 
30  NBSC. (2002). National Bureau of Statistics of the People’s Republic of China: Division of Investment in 
31  Fixed Assets 2001–2002. China Construction Industry Yearbook. China Statistics Press.  
32  Nuss, P., Ohno, H., Chen, W.‑Q., & Graedel, T. E [T. E.] (2019). Comparative analysis of metals use in 
33  the  United  States  economy.  Resources,  Conservation  and  Recycling,  145(26),  448–456. 
34  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.02.025 
35 
 

1  O’Mahony, M., & Timmer, M. P. (2009). Output, Input and Productivity Measures at the Industry Level: 
2  The  EU  KLEMS  Database.  The  Economic  Journal,  119(538),  F374-F403. 
3  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0297.2009.02280.x 
4  Ohno, H.,  Fukushima, Y.,  Matsubae, K  [Kazuyo],  Nakajima, K  [Kenichi],  &  Nagasaka, T.  (2017). 
5  Revealing Final Destination of Special Steel Materials with Input-Output-Based Material Flow 
6  Analysis. ISIJ International, 57(1), 193–199. https://doi.org/10.2355/isijinternational.ISIJINT-
7  2016-470 
8  Ohno, H., Matsubae, K [Kazuyo], Nakajima, K [Kenichi], Kondo, Y [Yasushi], Nakamura, S [Shinichiro], 
9  Fukushima, Y., & Nagasaka, T. (2017). Optimal Recycling of Steel Scrap and Alloying Elements: 
10  Input-Output based Linear Programming Method with Its Application to End-of-Life Vehicles 
11  in  Japan.  Environmental  Science  &  Technology,  51(22),  13086–13094. 
12  https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.7b04477 
13  Ohno, H., Matsubae, K [Kazuyo], Nakajima, K [Kenichi], Kondo, Y [Yasushi], Nakamura, S [Shinichiro], 
14  & Nagasaka, T. (2015). Toward the efficient recycling of alloying elements from end of life 
15  vehicle  steel  scrap.  Resources,  Conservation  and  Recycling,  100,  11–20. 
16  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2015.04.001 
17  Ohno, H., Nuss, P., Chen, W.‑Q., & Graedel, T. E [Thomas E.] (2016). Deriving the Metal and Alloy 
18  Networks of Modern Technology. Environmental Science & Technology, 50(7), 4082–4090. 
19  https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.5b05093 
20  Owen, A.,  Brockway, P.,  Brand-Correa, L.,  Bunse, L.,  Sakai, M.,  &  Barrett, J.  (2017).  Energy 
21  consumption-based  accounts:  A  comparison  of  results  using  different  energy  extension 
22  vectors. Applied Energy, 190, 464–473. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2016.12.089 
23  Pauliuk, S., Heeren, N., Hasan, M. M., & Müller, D. B [Daniel B.] (2019). A general data model for 
24  socioeconomic metabolism and its implementation in an industrial ecology data commons 
25  prototype.  Journal  of  Industrial  Ecology,  23(5),  1016–1027. 
26  https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12890 
27  Pauliuk, S.,  &  Hertwich, E. G.  (2015).  Socioeconomic  metabolism  as  paradigm  for  studying  the 
28  biophysical  basis  of  human  societies.  Ecological  Economics,  119,  83–93. 
29  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2015.08.012 
30  Pauliuk, S., Kondo, Y  [Yasushi],  Nakamura, S  [Shinichiro], &  Nakajima, K  [Kenichi]  (2017).  Regional 
31  distribution and losses of end-of-life steel throughout multiple product life cycles-Insights 
32  from the global multiregional MaTrace model. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 116, 
33  84–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2016.09.029 
36 
 

1  Pauliuk, S., Wang, T [Tao], & Müller, D. B [Daniel B.] (2013). Steel all over the world: Estimating in-use 
2  stocks  of  iron  for  200  countries.  Resources,  Conservation  and  Recycling,  71,  22–30. 
3  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2012.11.008 
4  Pauliuk, S., Wood, R., & Hertwich, E. G. (2015). Dynamic Models of Fixed Capital Stocks and Their 
5  Application in Industrial Ecology: A Dynamic Model of the Industrial Metabolism. Journal of 
6  Industrial Ecology, 19(1), 104–116. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12149 
7  PCA.  (2016).  Portland  Cement  Association.  U.S.  Cement  Industry  Annual  Yearbook  2016. 
8  http://www2.cement.org/econ/pdf/Yearbook2016_2sided.pdf 
9  Schiller, G., Müller, F., & Ortlepp, R. (2017). Mapping the anthropogenic stock in Germany: Metabolic 
10  evidence  for  a  circular  economy.  Resources,  Conservation  and  Recycling,  123,  93–107. 
11  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2016.08.007 
12  Schiller, G., Ortlepp, R., Krauß, N., Steger, S., Schütz, H [Helmut], Acosta-Fernández, J., Reichenbach, J., 
13  Wagner, J., & Baumann, J. (2015). Kartierung des anthropogenen Lagers in Deutschland zur 
14  Optimierung  der  Sekundärrohstoffwirtschaft.  Umweltbundesamt. 
15  https://www.umweltbundesamt.de/sites/default/files/medien/378/publikationen/texte_83
16  _2015_kartierung_des_anthropogenen_lagers.pdf 
17  Schulte, S., Jakobs, A., & Pauliuk, S. (2021). Relaxing the import proportionality assumption in multi-
18  regional input-output modelling. https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-232380/v1 
19  SERC.  (2012,  January  25).  as  cited  by  Pauliuk  et  al.  2013:  Spark  Steel  &  Economy  Research. 
20  http://www.steelscenario.com/research 
21  Södersten, C.‑J., Wood, R., & Wiedmann, T. (2020). The capital load of global material footprints. 
22  Resources,  Conservation  and  Recycling,  158,  104811. 
23  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.104811 
24  Södersten, C.‑J. H., Wood, R., & Hertwich, E. G. (2018). Endogenizing Capital in MRIO Models: The 
25  Implications for Consumption-Based Accounting. Environmental Science & Technology, 52(22), 
26  13250–13259. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.8b02791 
27  Spatari, S., Bertram, M., Gordon, R. B., Henderson, K., & Graedel, T. E [T. E.] (2005). Twentieth century 
28  copper stocks and flows in North America: A dynamic analysis. Ecological Economics, 54(1), 
29  37–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2004.11.018 
30  Stadler, K.,  Wood, R.,  Bulavskaya, T.,  Södersten, C.‑J.,  Simas, M.,  Schmidt, S.,  Usubiaga, A.,  Acosta-
31  Fernández, J.,  Kuenen, J.,  Bruckner, M.,  Giljum, S  [Stefan],  Lutter, S  [Stephan],  Merciai, S., 
32  Schmidt, J. H., Theurl, M. C., Plutzar, C., Kastner, T., Eisenmenger, N., Erb, K.‑H., . . . Tukker, A. 
33  (2018). EXIOBASE 3: Developing a Time Series of Detailed Environmentally Extended Multi-
37 
 

1  Regional  Input-Output  Tables.  Journal  of  Industrial  Ecology,  22(3),  502–515. 
2  https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12715 
3  Streeck, J., Wiedenhofer, D., Krausmann, F [Fridolin], & Haberl, H. (2020). Stock-flow relations in the 
4  socio-economic metabolism of the United Kingdom 1800–2017. Resources, Conservation and 
5  Recycling, 161, 104960. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2020.104960 
6  Streeck, J., Wieland, H., Pauliuk, S., Plank, B., Nakajima, K [Kenichi], & Wiedenhofer, D. (in revision_). 
7  A review of methods to trace material flows into final products in dynamic material flow 
8  analysis: a comparative application of methods to the USA and EXIOBASE3 regions. 
9  Takeyama, K.,  Ohno, H.,  Matsubae, K  [Kazuyo],  Nakajima, K  [Kenichi],  Kondo, Y  [Yasushi],  & 
10  Nagasaka, T. (2016). Dynamic material flow analysis of nickel and chromium associated with 
11  steel  materials  by  using  matrace.  Matériaux  &  Techniques,  104(6-7),  610. 
12  https://doi.org/10.1051/mattech/2017012 
13  Tanikawa, H., Fishman, T., Hashimoto, S., Daigo, I., Oguchi, M., Miatto, A., Takagi, S., Yamashita, N., & 
14  Schandl, H [Heinz] (2021). A framework of indicators for associating material stocks and flows 
15  to service provisioning: Application for Japan 1990–2015. Journal of Cleaner Production, 285, 
16  125450. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.125450 
17  Tisserant, A., Pauliuk, S., Merciai, S., Schmidt, J., Fry, J., Wood, R., & Tukker, A. (2017). Solid Waste and 
18  the Circular Economy: A Global Analysis of Waste Treatment and Waste Footprints: Global 
19  Analysis of Solid Waste and Waste Footprint. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 21(3), 628–640. 
20  https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12562 
21  Tukker, A., Koning, A. de, Owen, A., Lutter, S [Stephan], Bruckner, M., Giljum, S [Stefan], Stadler, K., 
22  Wood, R.,  &  Hoekstra, R.  (2018).  Towards  Robust,  Authoritative  Assessments  of 
23  Environmental Impacts Embodied in Trade: Current State and Recommendations. Journal of 
24  Industrial Ecology, 22(3), 585–598. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12716 
25  U.S. Bureau of Mines. (1941). Minerals Yearbook Review of 1940: Keiser, H.D. (Ed.), Prepared Under 
26  the Direction of E.W. Pehrson, p. 97.  
27  United Nations. (2009). System of national accounts 2008. United Nations.  
28  United Nations. (2014). System of Environmental-Economic Accounting 2012: Central Framework.  
29  US BEA. (2021). United States of America Bureau of Economic Analysis. Input-Output Accounts Data. 
30  https://www.bea.gov/industry/input-output-accounts-data 
31  USGS.  (2018).  Mineral  Commodity  Summaries  2018. 
32  https://minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/mcs/2018/mcs2018.pdf 
38 
 

1  Wang, T [Tao], Müller, D. B [Daniel B.], & Graedel, T. E [T. E.] (2007). Forging the anthropogenic iron 
2  cycle.  Environmental  Science  &  Technology,  41(14),  5120–5129. 
3  https://doi.org/10.1021/es062761t 
4  Weisz, H [Helga], & Duchin, F. (2006). Physical and monetary input–output analysis: What makes the 
5  difference?  Ecological  Economics,  57(3),  534–541. 
6  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2005.05.011 
7  Wiedenhofer, D.,  Fishman, T.,  Lauk, C.,  Haas, W.,  &  Krausmann, F  [Fridolin]  (2019).  Integrating 
8  Material Stock Dynamics Into Economy-Wide Material Flow Accounting: Concepts, Modelling, 
9  and  Global  Application  for  1900–2050.  Ecological  Economics,  156,  121–133. 
10  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2018.09.010 
11  Wiedmann, T., & Lenzen, M. (2018). Environmental and social footprints of international trade. Nature 
12  Geoscience, 11(5), 314–321. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-018-0113-9 
13  Wiedmann, T., Minx, J., Barrett, J., & Wackernagel, M. (2006). Allocating ecological footprints to final 
14  consumption  categories  with  input–output  analysis.  Ecological  Economics,  56(1),  28–48. 
15  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolecon.2005.05.012 
16  Wieland, H., Giljum, S [Stefan], Bruckner, M., Owen, A., & Wood, R. (2018). Structural production layer 
17  decomposition: a new method to measure differences between MRIO databases for footprint 
18  assessments.  Economic  Systems  Research,  30(1),  61–84. 
19  https://doi.org/10.1080/09535314.2017.1350831 
20  Wieland, H., Giljum, S [Stefan], Eisenmenger, N., Wiedenhofer, D., Bruckner, M., Schaffartzik, A., & 
21  Owen, A.  (2020).  Supply  versus  use  designs of environmental  extensions  in  input–output 
22  analysis: Conceptual and empirical implications for the case of energy. Journal of Industrial 
23  Ecology, 24(3), 548–563. https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.12975 
24  Wieland, H., Lenzen, M., Geschke, A., Fry, J., Wiedenhofer, D., Eisenmenger, N., Schenk, J., & Giljum, S 
25  [Stefan] (2021). The PIOLab: Building global physical input–output tables in a virtual laboratory. 
26  Journal  of  Industrial  Ecology,  371(1986),  Article  jiec.13215,  20110577. 
27  https://doi.org/10.1111/jiec.13215 
28  Yokoi, R., Nakatani, J., Hatayama, H., & Moriguchi, Y [Yuichi] (2022). Dynamic analysis of in-use copper 
29  stocks by the final product and end-use sector in Japan with implication for future demand 
30  forecasts.  Resources,  Conservation  and  Recycling,  180,  106153. 
31  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2022.106153 
32  Yokoi, R., Nakatani, J., & Moriguchi, Y [Yuichi] (2018). An Extended Model for Tracking Accumulation 
33  Pathways of Materials Using Input–Output Tables: Application to Copper Flows in Japan. 
34  Sustainability, 10(3), 876. https://doi.org/10.3390/su10030876 
39 
 

1  Zeltner, C.,  Bader, H.‑P.,  Scheidegger, R.,  &  Baccini, P.  (1999).  Sustainable  metal  management 
2  exemplified  by  copper  in  the  USA.  Regional  Environmental  Change,  1(1),  31–46. 
3  https://doi.org/10.1007/s101130050006 
4   
40 
 