DMP Template for the Social Sciences 
      Version 1.0, June 2018 
 
A DMP in a nutshell 
A Data Management Plan (DMP) is a structured guideline that describes the comprehensive lifecycle of data, 
from conception to storage, analysis, and preservation. DMPs help researchers to think through all relevant 
questions concerning the data their research will generate, and ensure attention remains focused on the long-
term accessibility and subsequent reusability of their data assets. DMPs provide a basic description of what 
kind of data will be produced and collected, and details about what will happen to the data both during a 
project and after it has been completed. This includes statements about the provenance of data, contextual 
information surrounding the data collection process, how data are conceptually related to data sets produced 
by similar studies, the infrastructures used to store and manage data, as well as information regarding the 
publication, citation, long-term access and, if necessary, destruction of data when the research lifecycle is 
complete. Humanities and social sciences data are unique in that they often consist of private information 
contributed by individual study participants, thus various questions regarding data protection, copyright 
attribution, exploitation rights, and licensing are also addressed in this template. 
 
FAIR data principles 
The template is also compliant with the FAIR principles to improve the findability, accessibility, interoperability, 
and reuse of the data. This implies that research data and contextual tools like software should be stored and 
made available for use in a suitable repository or archiving system and data should be provided with persistent 
identifiers. Data must be identifiable, accessible, traceable, interoperable, and whenever possible, available for 
subsequent use. In compliance with intellectual property rights, and if no third-party rights, legal requirements 
or property laws prohibit it, research data should be assigned a licence for open use. 
 
Note on the handling of the DMP 
Please consider the DMP as a research instrument, helping to structure and plan the research process and define 
the responsibilities within a joint research project. It can vary in length and detail depending also on the type of 
data and project-stage. Thus, not all questions might be relevant for you, especially at the beginning of a project. 
Rather regard the DMP as a dynamic document which can be updated until the end of the project. In order to 
keep track of different versions, the version number of each DMP should always be included in the administrative 
section below. 
 
 
Acknowledgement: Developed in the project e-infrastructures Austria Plus, created by AUSSDA – The Austrian 
Social Science Data Archive and WU Vienna University of Economics and Business.   
 
 This work is licenced under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). 
It is attributed to Veronika Heider, Lena Raffetseder, Barbara Sánchez Solís and Xenia Ulrich and published at 
Zenodo. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.1291816 
   
1 
 

1.  Administrative Data  
Provide basic information to help identifying your research project and people involved. 
Include: Principal investigator, project sponsor/ grant and number, project title, project coordinator (name, 
affiliation, email address, phone number, and IDs such as ORCID if available), author of the DMP (name, 
affiliation, email address, phone number, and IDs such as ORCID if available), start and end date of project, 
version of DMP, date of first DMP version, date of last update, short data summary, any policies you adhere to. 
You may add any additional basic information. 
 
 
Version of DMP  1.0 
 
Project coordinator      Yang Yucheng 
 
Principal investigator      Yang Yucheng 
 
Author of DMP      Yang Yucheng 
 
Data officer and  Yang Yucheng 
responsible for DMP     
Project title   
(Acronym)   
 
Start and end date of  5.12.2024-30.6.2025 
project   
 
Grant number  1 
 
Data summary  Urban form is an organic, dynamic and complex system which 
accumulates the urban growth, including population growth, 
constructions and daily activities, over several centuries. Having a solid 
understanding of urban form situation is one of the most critical factors 
of the conservation of historical urban landscape. However, there is still 
no common agreement about how to recognize the urban form 
precisely. In recent years, quantitative urban form studies have emerged 
with the development of information techniques. Because of the merits 
such as high efficiency and accuracy, more and more researchers are 
trying to use these approaches to address the recognition and category 
of urban form. In this research, I take Vienna as an example and attempt 
to find the principles of urban form distribution and classification in 
Vienna. Due to the long history of construction and human activities, 
Vienna possesses a rich accumulation of the urban form from different 
ages and styles, making it a great example for research 
 
 
 
 
2 
 

|    | 1.0                                                                        |    |
|:---|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---|
|    |                                                                            |    |
|    | Yang Yucheng                                                               |    |
|    |                                                                            |    |
|    | Yang Yucheng                                                               |    |
|    |                                                                            |    |
|    | Yang Yucheng                                                               |    |
|    |                                                                            |    |
|    | Yang Yucheng                                                               |    |
|    |                                                                            |    |
|    |                                                                            |    |
|    |                                                                            |    |
|    |                                                                            |    |
|    | 5.12.2024-30.6.2025                                                        |    |
|    |                                                                            |    |
|    |                                                                            |    |
|    | 1                                                                          |    |
|    |                                                                            |    |
|    | Urban form is an organic, dynamic and complex system which                 |    |
|    | accumulates the urban growth, including population growth,                 |    |
|    | constructions and daily activities, over several centuries. Having a solid |    |
|    | understanding of urban form situation is one of the most critical factors  |    |
|    | of the conservation of historical urban landscape. However, there is still |    |
|    | no common agreement about how to recognize the urban form                  |    |
|    | precisely. In recent years, quantitative urban form studies have emerged   |    |
|    | with the development of information techniques. Because of the merits      |    |
|    | such as high efficiency and accuracy, more and more researchers are        |    |
|    | trying to use these approaches to address the recognition and category     |    |
|    | of urban form. In this research, I take Vienna as an example and attempt   |    |
|    | to find the principles of urban form distribution and classification in    |    |
|    | Vienna. Due to the long history of construction and human activities,      |    |
|    | Vienna possesses a rich accumulation of the urban form from different      |    |
|    | ages and styles, making it a great example for research                    |    |
|    |                                                                            |    |
|    |                                                                            |    |

2.  Data Characteristics 
Provide information on the data collection/ generation process. Which data will be collected and how will it be 
collected. This also helps in evaluating which software and hardware will be necessary. This includes the type of 
data that will be generated, a description of methods and data handling as well as the formats that will be  
generated.  
Include: data provenance and data sources, versioning of data, method of data collection, formats of data, 
amount of data expected to be collected (gigabytes, terabytes), software/ hardware used for data collection/ 
processing/ storage, aspects on reuse (format), (personnel) costs for data processing and data storage. Will you 
re-use any existing data and how? What is the origin of these data?   
The source of the data is mainly from Geo-Information of Vienna City. The data will be collected by 
downloading from the website of Vienna City, and this will result in the format of CityGML 3.0 or shapefile. The 
building blocks information are also accessed from the website. Building height, an important factor for 
understanding urban form, also plays a critical role in my analysis. The formats generated will be readable by 
using Geographical software, such as ArcGIS Pro and QGIS. Remote sense images are also an important part of 
reference to study in the urban form. The city of Vienna also has the digital data in the website, and the 
precision of the data should be in 1-meter resolution. 
The temporal coverage should also be considered in the research. The different period of the data from 2000-
2024 in each 5 years would be compared to find the tendency of the urban form evaluation. 
During the data processing stage, the Multiple Fabric Assessment (MFA) protocol based on Araldi and Fusco 
(2019) will be employed for the identification and characterization of urban fabrics, and the publication of the 
data will be in a Shapefile format to ensure long-term usability. 
 
3.  Documentation and Metadata 
3.1. Metadata standards 
Provide information on the metadata standards you will be adhering to (you may include metadata standards 
used by your chosen repository system). Metadata are a standardized scheme to describe datasets. A unified 
metadata standard benefits findability and usability. The standard used in social sciences is DDI (Data 
Documentation Initiative). Will you be using standard vocabularies for all data types present in your dataset, to 
allow inter-disciplinary interoperability and to allow the metadata to be machine-actionable? In case it is 
unavoidable that you use uncommon or generate project-specific ontologies or vocabularies, will you provide 
mappings to more commonly used ontologies? What naming conventions do you follow? Also consider 
documenting the version number of the metadata standard you will be using. 
Include: structure of metadata, metadata standards, persistent identifiers (e.g. DOI). 
The metadata structure should include dataset name, description and keyword. 
The metadata standard DDI(Data Documentation Initiative) and ISO 19115(Geographic Information) will be 
used, as these are the standard for spatial data. The data formats will include Shapefile, CityGML, TIFF(for 
remoting sensing images). And the coordinate reference systems should based on the original data from the 
city of Vienna, Austria_Gauss-Krueger_M34_NORD-5Mio 
.The DOI and versioning including version numbers and update timestamps for the dataset will be used as the 
persistent identifiers. 
 
3.2. Documentation 
3 
 

Provide information on which documents you will prepare (documents, protocols, related records….). The 
documentation outlines the research process and ensures integrity, understandability and transparency of the 
data collection process and facilitates correct interpretation (also consider machine readability of the data and 
documentation). Has the software needed to access the data been sufficiently documented? Is it possible to 
include the relevant software (e.g. in open source code)?  
Include: methods reports, instruments of data collection (e.g. questionnaire, code), codebook, program code 
for data processing and data code for analysis and tools/methods of long-term archiving. You may also add 
informed consent forms, transcripts of an audio file as well as tools and software including the version number.  
The data collection and processing activities should include spatial data preparation and indicator computation. 
Spatial data preparation is about to explain the definition of the spatial units adapted for the study of Vienna. 
And indicator computation outlines the calculation of urban form, such as pedestrian ratio, building heigh, 
vegetation coverage, and the geoprocessing protocols for generating these metrics will be used. 
The code that was used to analysis the urban form should include analysis algorithms, for example, using Local 
Moran’s I for detecting spatial pattern characters. 
Prepared codebook should include the lists and explains about all variables and indicators, including street 
morphologies such as street grid, vegetation metrics, building scales, and network-building relationship 
indicators. And some examples should be provided for each variable to ensure clarity and reproducibility. 
 
 
 
 
3.3. Data quality control 
Provide information on the quality assurance measures (protocols) you will implement. 
Include: all data quality assurance processes, such as pretests, data entry validation, peer-review of data, 
repeat samples or measurements, definition of standardized processes and checklists, intercoder reliability 
measures. Provide information about deletion processes. Make sure to consider additional costs. In the event 
that research data and records are to be deleted or destroyed, either after expiration of the required archive 
duration or for legal/ ethical reasons, such action will be carried out only after considering all legal and ethical 
perspectives. The interests and contractual stipulations of third-party funders and other stakeholders, 
employees and partner participants in particular, as well as the aspects of confidentiality and security, must be 
taken into consideration when decisions about retention and destruction are made. Any action taken must be 
documented and be accessible for possible future audit. 
To ensure that the output of the data collections process will result in high-quality, valid that that can be 
replicated and reused, the following measures will be taken. 
Firstly, the research relies on the definition of indicators, such as urban morphology metrics including building 
contiguity, street network attributes. So, the clear definitions will enable the consistency in data collection and 
analysis. And geospatial analysis and statistical validation should also take into consideration. 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 

4.  Data Availability and Storage  
4.1. Data release and sharing strategy 
Provide information on how and when data will be released and made accessible for sharing (and further 
reuse).  
Include: the repository/archiving system(s) and persistent identifiers you will assign, any restrictions in the data 
release, sharing and usage options, how data will be shared within the project, how data will be shared outside 
the project, any restrictions in data sharing and why these restrictions exist, access options (open access, 
restricted access, no-access, scientific use, educational purposes etc.), license options used to pursue sharing 
strategy (e.g. Creative Commons, General Public License, GNU), machine-readability of licences, embargo 
periods, informing potential users about the availability of data, search keywords that optimize possibilities for 
re-use, data discovery strategies, identification procedure for persons accessing the data, interoperability of 
data, open software applications used, procedure when data collected is combined with data stemming from 
other sources to ensure interoperability and future reuse, costs for making data traceable according to  FAIR 
requirements (findable, accessible, interoperable, reusable).  
The data will be stored in a database under the „Creative Commons Namensnennung 4.0 Lience”, such as 
Zenodo. So, the dataset should be available to those who is interested in through the website.  Data should be 
storage in the widely accepted formats such as CSV, GeoJSON, Shapefile or TIFF. 
 
 
 
4.2. Data storage strategy  
Provide information on the processes and strategies in place to ensure safe data storage during the research 
process. Safe data storage also includes physical security of infrastructure. 
Include: software, collaborator access, security, backups, collaborative workspaces, transfer of data from the 
field to storage, costs, etc.  
During the research, data will be stored in a database, such as Zenodo, which is free and open access with the 
support of geospatial data formats. And regularly back up date using cloud services or other hard drives is 
necessary in order not to lost the key data elements. 
 
 
 
 
4.3. Data preservation strategy 
Provide information on the processes and strategies in place to ensure safe data storage and access to data 
after the research project is completed. Describe which data will be archived long-term and how this decision 
will be made.  
Include: the duration of the guaranteed storage period, what will happen to data not archived long-term 
(deleting or erasing data, deletion strategies and protocols), where data will be preserved to ensure permanent 
access (state the name of the repository), any associated costs (for archiving or while processing data before 
archiving, including legal and ethical questions and software considerations), which long-term formats will be 
used (does the repository suggest or prescribe any formats).  
5 
 

All data collected as part of the urban morphology research will be available for the interested researchers for a 
long period. The data should be saved in a public accessible repository such as Zenodo. And the stored file 
should be the file formats which is widely used including GeoJSON, csv to keep the data’s accessibility.The 
repository will assign persistent identifiers to ensure its reliability of location and citation.  
 
 
 
  
5.  Legal and Ethical Aspects 
5.1. Legal Aspects 
Provide information on any issues that may arise during data collection, storage, release, sharing and 
publishing.  
Include: considerations on legal or ethical barriers to sharing data, data ownership, planned license for reuse or 
replication, any restrictions on data reuse or replication and why, for projects with international partners 
consider different national legislation, who has permission to publish data (copyright, ownership, Intellectual 
Property Rights, data protection), legal situation concerning copyright, exploitation and individual rights, 
permission to collect data (informed consent), permission for third-party data used in research, processes in 
case of breaches, personal information been used in the research and is anonymization, pseudonymization or 
recoding necessary, additional costs for legal questions. 
Data collected in this research project is owned by city of Vienna. Permission to collect data was granted by 
Creative Commons Namensnennung 4.0 Lience. And this license will allow to reuse and replication of the data 
under the permission of the original authors. 
Sensitive geospatial data may have some legal restrictions under the data protection laws. 
In this research, no personal data will be used.  
 
 
5.2. Ethical Aspects  
Provide information on any issues that may arise during data collection, storage, sharing, release and 
publishing.  
Note that in multi-beneficiary projects it is also possible for specific beneficiaries to keep their data closed if 
relevant provisions are made in the consortium agreement and are in line with the reasons for opting out. 
Include: ensuring compliance with informed consent, scientific standards and research integrity, necessity of 
ethical review board, protecting identity of participants, storage and transfer of sensitive data to permanent 
storage, how to ensure respondents are not negatively affected by participating in the research project. 
There is no personal data used in the research. Data storage systems will be used and have access control 
method to keep the data safe. Data containing sensitive information including urban population, sensitive 
places like military base may be restricted to prevent misuse or misrepresentation. A documented protocol will 
be in place to address potential breaches, including notifying affected parties and corrective measures. 
 
 
 
6 
 