Notch Solution
A set of components and tools to solve notched/cutout phones layout problems for Unity.
Whether you like it or not, the time has come for us designers to design in context of a notch and
embraceitinsteadofhidingit. Thistoolalsoenablesdesign‑timepreviewwhichhelpyouiterateyour
design without building the game.
Official website : http://exceed7.com/notch‑solution/
Questions/Problems/Suggestions : 5argon@exceed7.com Discord : https://discord.gg/J4sCcj4
Easy way to pay for this software
Are you looking for a way to say thanks to this open source work other than code contribution?
It is easy! You can take a look at my myriad of niche Unity Asset Store audio plugins in my publisher
page, grab something for your game, or tell your audio‑caring friends about them. Thank you!
How to use
With internet connection you should visit : http://www.exceed7.com/notch‑solution
1

Without internetconnection, the websitementioned wasgeneratedfromfiles in a hidden folder. Cur‑
rently you may see it in a zipped form Documentation~.zip, because Asset Store do not support
publishing unimported folders yet so I have to zip them to make them go together.
Please unzip it to access the documentation. Also you can unzip Samples~.zip to access unim‑
ported samples, which you can copy them to your project to make them actually import.
After you geta Documentation~ folder, you can readthem in their Markdown form fromyour code
editor. Markdowns arehuman readable bydesign. They won’t be importedto Unity too, as the folder
has a trailing ~. It is great because Unity will not create .meta files for them and not import tutorial
textsandimages, theyarenotapartofyourgame. ThesamegoestounzippedSample~folder,they
are not supposed to import until you want to see them. This format is currently the best practice.
WithanIDElikeVisualStudioCode,youcanuse“Markdown: OpenPreviewtotheSide”toevendisplay
a nicely rendered Markdown with images working properly. Navigate by clicking on different files on
the folder tree.
License
MIT
2