SQLFlow ‑ A tool that tracks column‑level data lineage
TrackColumn‑LevelDataLineageformorethan20majordatabasesincludingSnowflake,Hive,Spark‑
SQL, Teradata, Oracle, SQL Server, AWS redshift, BigQuery, etc.
Build and visualize lineage from SQL script from query history, ETL script, Github/Bitbucket, Local
filesystem and remote databases.
Exploring lineage using an interactive diagram or programmatically using Restful APIs or SDKs.
Discover data lineage in this query:
1 insert into emp (id,first_name,last_name,city,postal_code,ph)
2 select a.id,a.first_name,a.last_name,a.city,a.postal_code,b.ph
3 from emp_addr a
4 inner join emp_ph b on a.id = b.id;
SQLFlowpresentsanicecleangraphtoyouthattellswherethedatacamefrom,whattransformations
it underwent along the way, and what other data items are derived from this data value.
What SQLFlow can do for you
• Scan your database and discover the data lineage instantly.
• Automatically collect SQL script from github/bitbucket or local file system.
• Provide a nice cleam diagram to the end‑user to understand the data lineage quickly.
• programmatically using Restful APIs or SDKs to get lineage in CSV, JSON, Graphml format.
• IncorporatethelineagemetadatadecodedfromthecomplexSQLscriptintoyourownmetadata
database for further processing.
• Visualize the metadata already existing in your database to release the power of data.
• Performimpactanalysisandroot‑causeanalysisbytracinglineagebackwardsorforwardswith
several mouse click.
• Able to process SQL script from more than 20 major database vendors.
1

| 1 insert into emp (id,first_name,last_name,city,postal_code,ph)   |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2 select a.id,a.first_name,a.last_name,a.city,a.postal_code,b.ph  |
| 3 from emp_addr a                                                 |
| 4 inner join emp_ph b on a.id = b.id;                             |

How to use SQLFlow
• Open the official website of the SQLFlow and paste your SQL script or metadata to get a nice
clean lineage diagram.
• Call the Restful API of the SQLFlow in your own code to get data lineage metadata decoded by
the SQLFlow from the SQL script.
• The on‑premise version of SQLflow enables you to use it on your own server to keep the data
safer.
Restful APIs
• SQLFlow API document
• Client in C#
SQLFlow architecture
• Architecture document
User manual and FAQ
• User guide
• SQLFlow FAQ
2