On the Demise of African Traditional Oral Literature                                                                                Bwo-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (Jarh) 4(3)” 
 
ORCID of the Journal: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-0723-9485  
DOI Number of the Paper:  
Edition Link: Journal of Academic Research for Humanities JARH, 4(4) Oct-Dec 2024 
Link of the Paper: https://jar.bwo-researches.com/index.php/jarh/article/view/519 
HJRS Link: Journal of Academic Research for Humanities JARH (HEC-Recognized for 2023-2024) 
ON THE DEMISE OF AFRICAN TRADITIONAL ORAL LITERATURE. 
SUR L’EXTINCTION DE LA LITTERATURE ORALE TRADITIONNELLE AFRICAINE 
Corresponding &   KARIM MAHAMANE KARIMOU, Doctoral Student, (École Doctorale des Lettres, Arts, Sciences de 
Author 1:  l’Homme et de la Société), Abdou Moumouni University—UAM (Niamey/Niger), Part-time lecturer 
(on writing and translation) at Abdou Moumouni University, Part-time lecturer (on technical English) 
at École des Mines, de l’Industrie et de la Géologie—EMIG, Niamey, ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-
0001-6297-3754, Email: abudju.karim@gmail.com. 
Co-Author 2:  OUMAROU ADAMOU IDE, Associate Professor at Djibo Hamani University of Tahoua—UDH/T—
  (Niger), ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0006-4286-4597 , Email: adamouideoumarou83@yahoo.com
________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Paper Information          Abstract 
Citation of the paper:       QR Code for the Paper:  This article aims at analysing the true causes of the     
(Jarh) Karimou, K, M., & Ide, O, A.,  demise  of  African  oral  traditional  literature  in 
(2024). On the Demise of African 
general,  and  that  of  Zarma  oral  literature  in 
Traditional Oral Literature. Journal 
particular. This article contends that contrary to the 
of  Academic  Research  for 
allegations  of  some  scholars—according  to  which 
Humanities, 4(3). 
Islam is the cause of the death of oral literature in 
   
Africa—Islam  does  not  condemn  or  prohibit  oral 
Subject Areas for JARH:     
literature  across  the  board;  it  is,  indeed,  good  to 
1 Humanities 
2 Social Science  note that in its early history, Islam was conspicuously 
  a religion built upon orality. The Holy Book of Islam—
Timeline of the Paper at JARH:  The Qur’an—itself was revealed orally before being     
Received on: 06-09-2024.  written down. How, then, can anyone contend that 
Reviews Completed: 06-11-2024. 
Islam indiscriminately condemns oral literature? Is 
Accepted on: 06-11-2024. 
Islam, then, the true cause of the demise of African 
Online on: 07-11-2024. 
literature, or more specifically, is it the cause of the 
License:     
obsolescence of the Songhay-Zarma oral literature? 
What then are the real causes of this demise? To 
 
answer  these  questions,  we  adopt  a  hermeneutic 
Creative  Commons  Attribution-Share 
approach  as  a  theoretical  framework.  The  article 
Alike 4.0 International License 
concludes that the causes of the demise of African 
Recognized for BWO-R:     
oral  literature  are  manyfold—Islam  playing  but  a 
very marginal role in this.  
 
Keywords:  African,  Literature,  Islam,  Demise, 
Published by BWO Researches INTL.:     
Literature. 
 
 
   
DOI Image of the paper: 
    
 
 
 
72
 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| Corresponding &   | KARIM MAHAMANE KARIMOU, Doctoral Student, (École Doctorale des Lettres, Arts, Sciences de              |
| Author 1:         | l’Homme et de la Société), Abdou Moumouni University—UAM (Niamey/Niger), Part-time lecturer            |
|                   | (on writing and translation) at Abdou Moumouni University, Part-time lecturer (on technical English)   |
|                   | at École des Mines, de l’Industrie et de la Géologie—EMIG, Niamey, ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-      |
|                   | 0001-6297-3754, Email: abudju.karim@gmail.com.                                                         |
|:------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Co-Author 2:      | OUMAROU ADAMOU IDE, Associate Professor at Djibo Hamani University of Tahoua—UDH/T—                    |
|                   | (Niger), ORCID: https://orcid.org/0009-0006-4286-4597 , Email: adamouideoumarou83@yahoo.com            |

On the Demise of African Traditional Oral Literature                                                                     Bwo-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (Jarh) 4(3)” 
Introduction  exactement  les  marabouts  présents  dans  le 
  Rightly or wrongly the religion of Islam is held  village ou dans le canton, est banni. (Bornand, 
to  be  the  main  cause  of  the  demise  of  2020, p. 7). In an RFI broadcast titled “Grand 
Songhay-Zarma  oral  literature.  But  broadly  Reportage:  Dialba  et  Sandra,  ou  la  Parole 
speaking,  orality  has  an  incredibly  special  Zarma  Sauvée”  (Sadou  &  Tulet,  2013), 
place  in  this  religion.  The  revelation  of  the  Bornand makes similar remarks. The following 
Qur’an to Prophet Muhammad (ﷺ) orally by  are  the  implications  of  her  combined 
Allah  (God),  before  being  written  down  by  statements (made in both the foregoing quote 
mankind,  is  a  real  proof  of  that  place.  The  and the RFI broadcast):   (I) Islam was weak 
Prophet Muhammad (ﷺ  ) himself had poets— aforetime, but now it is growing stronger and 
with Hassan Ibn Thabit, Ka’ab Ibn Malik, and  it  is  due  to  this  that  oral  literature  comes 
Abd-Allah  Ibn  Rawaahah  being  the  most  under  threat  therefrom;  (II)  traditional  or 
famous  therefrom.  The  prophet  once  said  puritan Islam (izala) also poses real danger to 
regarding these men: “Neither the poetry of  oral literature; (III) Islam abhors oral literature 
Hassan bin Thabit nor [that of] Ka’ab bin Malik  sub-genres such as the proverbs of the she-
nor [that of] Abdulla bin Abi Rawaha is poetry,  grinders because they lead to conflicts among 
but it is wisdom” (Hawatmeh, 2017).  women,  for  they  insult  and  lampoon  one 
Literature Review  another  through  these  special  types  of 
On  the  Demise  of  Songhay-Zarma  Oral  proverbs;  (IV)  this  religion  also  abhors  tales 
literature  because they are made up, and hence are lies; 
  Among the scholars who hold that Islam is  (V)  since  women  excel  in  these  genres, 
the  root  cause  of  the  demise  of  Songhay- banishing them is tantamount to oppressing 
Zarma oral literature, Sandra Bornand is the  women; (VI) since people are adhering to the 
first  whose  statements  the  authors  of  this  arguments  of  the  izala,  and  are  circulating 
article came across (to be more precise, that  these arguments through the society, women 
co-author Karim M.K. came across). Bornand  are more and more influenced by these and 
contends that: Suite à l’influence grandissante  they  willingly  abandon  those  oral  literature 
de l’islam et à l’arrivée du mouvement izala  sub-genres, fearing that they might go to hell; 
venant  du  Nord  Nigeria,  des  imams  et  and  (VII)  this  leads  to  a  situation  where 
marabouts  ont  commencé  à  disqualifier  whatever the religion abhors is not practiced 
certains genres littéraires en se basant sur des  by the people and, contrarywise, whatever it 
critères  dits  «  religieux  »,  cherchant  par  ce  condones is upheld by all the people so much 
biais  à  en  interdire  la  pratique.  Ainsi  des  so  that  this  leads  to  the  demise  of  oral 
genres  comme  le  conte  ou  le  proverbe  de  literature  in  the  Songhay-Zarma  culture. 
pileuse  peuvent  être  caractérisés  comme  Before  proceeding,  it  is  good  to  give  some 
relevant  du  péché  du  fait  de  sa  nature  information  about  the  proverbs  of  the  she-
mensongère  pour  le  premier,  de  sa  nature  grinders;  such  proverbs  are  called  Duru-ka-
conflictuelle pour le second. Il est intéressant  yaasay  in  Songhay-Zarma,  which  literally 
de relever que la plupart des discours bannis  means, “grind-and-utter-proverbs.” These are 
relèvent de la littérature orale féminine. Or les  proverbs that women narrate while they grind 
arguments des izala sont de plus en plus repris  or crush cereals in mortars when they do not 
dans la société et les femmes zarma renoncent  have access to mills, or when they prefer to do 
toujours  plus,  par  exemple,  à  énoncer  des  such  a  work  manually.  Amadou  Saïbou 
proverbes en pilant de peur d’aller en enfer. On  Adamou has this to say about these proverbs: 
se rapproche donc d’une dichotomie ou tout ce  The  poetry  of  grinders  is  a  type  of  outlet 
qui  n’est  pas  agrée  par  la  religion,  ou  plus  through  which  women  expose  the 
4 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

On the Demise of African Traditional Oral Literature                                                                     Bwo-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (Jarh) 4(3)” 
misfortunes as well as the good fortunes that  from the rest, with poetry as its anchor and 
they  go  through  in  their  households  and  in  rhetorical foundation. In this category, Gawlo 
their  lives.  (2008,  p.  376;  our  translation).  stands out, as a bard from the noble class of 
Going back to Bornand’s submission that Islam  society. (Oumarou & Abdou Moumouni, 2023, 
causes  the  death  of  oral  literature,  it  is our  pp. 239-240)  
contention  that  nothing  is  further  from  the  Exploration of Other Causes of the Demise of 
truth; indeed, Bornand depicts the people as  Oral Literature 
angels  who  always  obey  the  religious    Frank  Ikeji,  an  author  who  is  more  honest 
injunctions. We shall come back to this later.  and  impartial  than  Bornand,  says  that  the 
But, for the time being, the question arises, is  reasons for the “near obsolescence” of African 
Islam the only cause, or the most important  oral  literature  “are  varied  and  quite 
cause,  of  the  destruction  of  oral  literature  intimidating.”  (s. d.,  p.  4)  What,  then,  are 
among  the  Africans  in  general,  and  the  these reasons? 
Songhay-Zarma in particular? Before trying to  Colonialism (and Christianity) 
answer  these  questions,  we  need  to  have    Ikeji goes on to show that it is the “coming of 
some knowledge about the craft of griots in  the Whiteman to Africa as a missionary and 
Niger, and about the functions that they fulfil  colonial master” that is the main cause of the 
(or  fulfilled)  in  their  communities:  […]  the  demise  of  African  traditional  oral  literature, 
jesere [Songhay-Zarma bards, griots, historians,  for it led to ‘one thing’, which is ‘the uprooting 
genealogists, etc.] memorize the genealogies  of our culture’ (s. d., p. 4). This is so because 
of important families, recite the stories of the  the  early  colonial  masters  and  missionaries 
Songhai,  and  tell  the  exploits  of  famous  abhorred  everything  African,  including  the 
ancestors through epic poetry […] Their chief  culture and the oral literature. This led to a 
function  […]  is  praise-singing,  chanting  the  colonial  mentality  that  Ikeji  sums  up  as: 
praises  of  free-born  people  and  exhorting  “cherish  everything  western  and  condemn 
them to bravery and good deeds […] In this  everything African.” (s. d., p. 4) For Ngugi, one 
role, they enhance the reputation and exalt  “of  the  most  important  aspects  of  our  pre-
the values of the burcin […] They also perform  colonial  literature  was  the  oral  tradition”; 
at  weddings,  naming  ceremonies,  and  indeed, in a context where the overwhelming 
festivals,  sometimes  acting  as  masters  of  majority  of  African  languages  were  not 
ceremony on these occasions (DeValve, 2018,  ‘reduced  to  writing’,  it  goes  without  saying 
p. 172‑175). These are statements from John  that this oral tradition was utterly significant, 
R. DeValve, an American scholar who has lived  so  much  so  that  it  was  the  most  utilized 
in Niger for more than 20 years, and who has  medium “by the anti-colonial forces to make 
written  a  doctoral  dissertation  on  Songhay- statements of resistance.” (1993b, p. 106) One 
Zarma musicology. In a similar vein, Oumarou  of  the best  examples  of  the  involvement of 
&  Abdou  Moumouni  clarify  that:  In  the  colonial  masters  in  the  destruction  of  the 
Songhay-Zarma  culture  […]  the  griot  class  cultural heritage of Africa is given below by 
constitutes the memory of the people through  Ngugi:  Among  the  Agikuyu  of  Kenya  there 
the  preservation  and  perpetuation  of  the  used to be a Gikuyu poetry festival, or shall I 
traditions  and  cultures  of  the  region.  The  say,  competition,  which  drew  large  crowds. 
griots  are  both  historiographers  and  The best poets of the various regions would 
genealogists  of  the  community’s  socio- meet  in  the  arena,  like  in  a  battle,  and 
cultural  practices.  But  in  this  great  court  of  compete with words and instant compositions. 
traditionalists  and  holders  of  ancestral  These  poets  had  even  developed  a  form  of 
knowledge, there is a group that stands out  hieroglyphics which they kept to themselves. 
5 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

On the Demise of African Traditional Oral Literature                                                                     Bwo-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (Jarh) 4(3)” 
This kind of festival was killed by the British for  more  individualistic”;  likewise,  “materialism 
they did not want crowds of people meeting  has  become  the  order  of  the  day”; 
and practicing things that they, in the colonial  consequentially,  the  pursuit  of  “money  and 
administration, could not understand. (1993a,  other  material  things  has  forced  people  to 
p. 37).   abandon traditional activities and profession[s] 
Western-Style African Education & Western  which  are  not  materially  rewarding,  thus 
Culture  nobody takes time off to tell stories or sing … 
  As per A.O. Dasylva, “the intervention of the  traditional songs” (s. d., p. 5). Another factor 
imperialist  West  and  the  subsequent  which  has  certain  impact  on  African 
imposition  of  its  rather  alien  educational  traditional  oral  literature,  is  the  fact  that 
system and policies were largely responsible  traditional oral artists “were once attached to 
for  cultural  disorientation”  (2007,  p.  329),  noble patrons from whom they derived their 
current  and  subsequent  emphases  added).  sustenance”; since colonial masters abolished 
For Al-Amine Mazrui, “Under the initial impact  the  class  system  and  introduced  “formal 
of the English language and its detribalizing  education,  their  patrons  have  lost  much  of 
effect,  African  nationalism  therefore  turned  their wealth and influence” (DeValve, 2018, p. 
away from tribal songs.” (1968, p. 296) Sikiru  230–231);  as  a  result,  they  could  no  longer 
Adeyemi Ogundokun, for his part, argues that  sustain  those  oral  artists  and  griots.  Griots, 
it is the “emphasis on written documents and  then, had to gradually abandon their verbal 
Western  education  [that]  marked  the  artistry to work just like the other members of 
beginning  of  the  gradual  erosion  and  the community to feed themselves and their 
disappearance of the use of oral literature in  families. According to Mazrui, in the mentality 
most African communities, if not all.” (2015, p.  of  the  Westerner,  “song  and  dance  are 
3). As for Ikeji, he holds that thanks to formal  domains  of  leisure”;  therefore,  when  they 
education,  literacy,  and  printed  books,  it  is  established  educational  systems  in  Africa, 
possible to preserve historical events as well  those  institutions  of  learning  “have  treated 
as all other forms of cultural heritage, through  African  song  and  dance  as  if  they  were 
writing, and this makes oral literature, insofar  similarly divorced from work and productivity” 
as  it  is  about  preserving  and  transmitting  (1975,  p.  197).  Mazrui  remarks  that  in 
heritage, completely obsolete in the minds of  Western  countries,  people  care  more  about 
the Africans; on this showing, it is only natural  recession,  and  inflation  than  they  do  about 
that oral literature falls into irrelevance (s. d.,  oral literature, which is only natural given the 
p. 4). Moreover, given the fact that modern  fact  that  for  them  literature  is  for  leisure. 
forms  of  education  are  systematized,  the  Contrariwise,  in  the  African  realm,  what 
acquisition  of  knowledge  “take[s]  away  the  people  care  about  are  droughts  and  floods, 
young … from home” and, consequently, “they  and when famine strikes, “there is always the 
are no longer available at home to participate  danger  of  bitter  jealousies  and  acrimony  as 
in many of the traditional activities” involving  families  compete  for  meager  resources.” 
oral literature in one way or another (s. d., p.  (1975, p. 197) Owing to this situation, Africans 
4). Yet another thing to be kept in mind is that,  need  oral  literature,  as  “Songs  foster 
due to a paradigm shift from the traditional  economic solidarity when the need to share 
African worldview to the Western one, “The  what is available is compelling.” (1975, p. 197) 
communal spirit of traditional attitudes which  Songs  also help  them preserve  their  shared 
hitherto permeated the African culture is fast  identity.  Apart  from  such  functions,  oral 
eroding”, for it is clear for anybody who has  literature  through  songs  and  proverbs, 
eyes  to  see,  that  nowadays  “the  African  is  enables young people “to memorize lessons 
6 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

On the Demise of African Traditional Oral Literature                                                                     Bwo-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (Jarh) 4(3)” 
of  social  commitment  and  service  and  to  consists of materials that are not only several 
remember with awe the hazards of disloyalty  generations  old  but  are  also  transmitted  by 
to kinsmen and ancestors.” (1975, p. 197).   word  of  mouth,  have  any  relevance  in  a 
Urbanization  modern  age  that  is  everywhere  visibly 
According to Enongene Mirabeau Sone, it is  assaulted  by  enormous  scientific  and 
the  important  cultural  and  social  disruption  technological forces? Do such forms as myths, 
that Africa has gone through and continues to  tales,  legends,  proverbs,  riddles,  and  oral 
go through, that led to the gradual demise of  songs fit into such an age? Do such forms have 
African culture and oral literature (2018, p. 16).  a  message,  relevance,  or  significance  for  a 
He goes on to declare, in no uncertain terms,  modern,  highly  technologized  age?  (Sone, 
that “One of the consequences of this change  2015, p. 9). Ikeji answers Okoh by stating that 
is the rapid Westernization of the population,  computers are the greatest threats that oral 
which  is  seriously  affecting  the  situation  of  literature  faces;  due  to  computers,  people, 
oral  literature.”  (2018, p.  16)  This  manifests  especially the young among them, no longer 
itself in the fact that gradual numbers of rural  care  for  traditional  forms  of  entertainment 
Africans are migrating from their homogenous  such  as  oral  literature  and  its  sub-genres; 
areas  that  favor  the  development  of  oral  rather, they prefer to browse the web or to 
literature to more urbanized towns that are  stream videos and movies over the internet; 
not only heterogeneous but also pose serious  they can do so “even all day and all night.” 
threats  to  oral  literature.  Having  been  (s. d., p. 5). Another threat that oral literature 
removed  from  their  natural  settings,  these  faces  is  video  games,  according  to  Isidore 
people  can  no  longer  participate  in  the  Okpewho: “Video games entertain a far larger 
creation and sharing of oral literature and, in  portion of the population than would care to 
consequence, oral literature dies out in these  go and watch oral performances” (2007b, p. 
rural  villages  and  fails  to  blossom  in  the  10). In the ensuing quote, Okpewho suggests 
urbanized  towns  wherein  all  these  people  that,  apart  from  the  modern  forms  of 
congregate (Ikeji, s. d., p. 4).   entertainment,  the  impoverishment  of 
Modern Technology & Entertainment  Africans  made  them  turn  away  from 
Ogundokun  agrees  with  Ikeji  when  he  traditional culture and, quite naturally, from 
indicated that printed books contribute to the  oral literature also: For one thing, the invasion 
destruction  of  oral  literature;  Ogundokun,  of more modern forms of communication and 
hence, sustains that “the print technology, the  entertainment—the FM radio, TV, the internet, 
new media, and the internet have adversely  and  the  many  portable  forms  of 
affected  African  culture.”  (2015,  p.  3)  Other  telecommunications  that  can  sustain 
scholars  have  made  similar  claims;  for  conversation for extended periods of leisure 
instance,  Lawali  maintains  that  “the  rapid  time—have considerably reduced the appeal 
technological  development  and  of  performances  that  brought  families  and 
globalization  …  constitute  a  real  menace  to  communities  together  in  open-air  and 
the traditional oral songs.” (2021, p. 240) For  community-hall  interactions.  For  another 
Sone, “other forms of media entertainment …  thing—and  perhaps  more  seriously—the 
not  only  compete  with  oral  literature  but  steady decline (or should I say collapse?) of 
dominate  it.  …  it  follows  logically  that  oral  the social, political, and economic welfare in 
literature as a popular form of entertainment  many  an  African  nation  has  somewhat 
is gradually falling into decline.” (2018, p. 16)  diminished  our  people’s  commitment  to 
In  a  similar  vein,  Okoh  poses  the  following  traditions that once fitted so well into their 
issues:  Can  oral  literature,  which  generally  scale of values. (2009, p. 110).  
7 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

On the Demise of African Traditional Oral Literature                                                                     Bwo-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (Jarh) 4(3)” 
Modern Economy and Job Market  The Rise of Fake Jesere 
Traditional activities such as agriculture, and  DeValve  reports  that  these  days,  economic 
Ikeji sustains, did not require people to travel  hardship  and  the  craving  for  riches,  have 
long distances, or to move to remote locations;  pushed several free-born Songhay people into 
contrarywise,  modern  job  markets  force  taking  on  the  role  of  griots,  especially  in 
people to leave their hometowns, in pursuit of  urbanized  towns;  DeValve  calls  them  ‘fake 
a living. Since they did not have to travel long  jesere’, and goes on to state that, since they 
distances,  in  traditional  African  settings,  did  not  inherit  the  craft  from  their  fathers, 
people had enough spare time to participate  they sometimes do not know the genealogies 
in oral literature performances (s. d., p. 5).  of  the  Songhay  people  and  their  stories.  In 
Arrogance & Negative Stereotypes  consequence, these ‘fake jesere’ give “a bad 
DeValve is right to the point when he indicates  name” to the real griots and they “are often 
that one of the reasons why oral literature is  confused with them” (2018, p. 172‑175). The 
on the decline, is the fact that descendants of  population sees them “as parasites, beggars, 
griots and other oral artists refuse to take up  public  entertainers,  liars,  flatterers,  and 
the traditional lines of activity of their fathers  sycophants”;  quite to  the  contrary,  the  true 
because they contend that such activities are  desire  is  a  historian,  a  genealogist,  and  an 
no  longer  respected,  as  they  are  associated  entertainer, who is “still highly valued for his 
“with  the  lower  classes,  former  slaves,  and  contributions to society”, but such a griot “has 
‘animists’”  (2018,  p.  141)  In  a  TV5-Monde  largely  disappeared  [and]  …  has  been 
news report titled “Le Niger Pleure Le Grand  supplanted  by  a  lazy,  free-spirited, 
Griot  Zarma  Djibo  Badjé”,  the  son  of  Djibo  disrespectful, persistent ‘panhandler’ without 
Badjé,  the  last  Songhay-Zarma  master-griot  shame  or  inhibitions”;  and,  unfortunately, 
(who  passed  away  in  2018)  makes  similar  owing to the proliferation of these fake griots, 
remarks unto the ones reported by DeValve:  “the true profession gets belittled and driven 
You know, it is not easy, especially with this  underground.” (2018, p. 172‑175) 
generation, whenever you are seen doing this  Discussion 
[that is, practicing the craft of a griot], you are  Countering Bornand’s Arguments 
seen  as,  I  do  not  know,  as  a  slave,  or  as  …  Oral Literature is Used in Islamic Sermons 
People insult you … Aforetime, when you are    Thomas Hale reports an anecdote recounted 
a  griot,  at  the  very  least,  great  respect  was  by  Ibn  Battuta,  which  goes  as  follows:  in 
shown  to  you  (TV5MONDE,  2018,  our  festival  days,  griots  and  poets  gather  in  the 
translation). We contend that only arrogance  palace of the king and stand before him, while 
leads  such  people  to  adopt  such  lines  of  reciting  poetry,  which  is  a  form  of  Islamic 
reasoning. First, griots in the Songhay-Zarma  sermon  through  which  they  admonish  the 
culture are not slaves, they are in a position  king to do good deeds; Ibn Battuta concludes 
that  is  between  the  nobles  and  the  slaves;  by  saying:  “I  was  informed  that  this 
second all, if one’s father is not a noble, and  performance  is  old  amongst  them;  they 
one  takes  up  his  line  of  work,  and  people  continued it  from  before  Islam.”  (Quoted  in 
qualify one as a descendant of a slave, have  Hale,  1990,  p.  37)  Likewise,  Fatoumata 
they  lied?  Refusing  to  inherit  the  line  of  Mounkaïla enlightens that when the Tilwâti, 
activity of one’s father, does it change one’s  the anthem of the Zarma, the most ritualized 
status?  All  the  descendants  of  griots,  who  form of The Epic of Zabarkane—which is only 
were  schooled,  abandoned  the  traditional  narrated on particularly solemn occasions—is 
activities  of  their  forefathers  to  pursue  performed, “elders or marabouts sometimes 
Western-style careers.   contribute  additional  information  or  correct 
8 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

On the Demise of African Traditional Oral Literature                                                                     Bwo-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (Jarh) 4(3)” 
details  in  the  various  episodes,  but  they  by  indicating  that  poets  ‘speak  about  every 
always do so in the form of a chronicle; only  subject  in  their  poetry’,  and  that  ‘they  say 
the djassarés sing or declaim the epic itself.”  what they do not do’. We hereby learn that it 
(1993,  p.  9)  With  the  strength  of  these  is not appropriate for a poet to speak about 
arguments, we pose the following question:  every  subject,  without  any  restraint,  any 
how can anyone pretend that Islam destroys  bashfulness,  and  any  regard  for  the 
oral  literature  in  Niger  when  we  see  oral  sacredness  of  some  subjects,  or  for  the 
literature being used for the benefit of Islam  feelings  of  decent  people  who  might  hear 
or when we see Islamic clerics contributing to  their  compositions.  We  also  learn  that  they 
the performance of the Tilwâti?  pretend to do such good that they never do; 
Islam  Does  not  Outrightly  Condemn  Oral  hence they are arrogant, they project a false 
Literature.  image of themselves, and they urge people to 
Speaking of poets, Allah says, in the Glorious  do  that  which  they,  themselves,  do  not  do. 
Qur’an:  The tradition tells us that when the first set of 
As for the poets, [only] the erring follow  verses,  discussed  above,  were  revealed,  the 
them  poets of the prophet were anxious; they felt 
See you not that they speak about every  that Allah had prohibited any form of poetry; 
subject (praising people—right or wrong) in  besides,  they  wondered  whether  they  had 
their poetry?  been indulging in a sinful activity for all this 
And that they say what they do not do.  time (before the revelation of the verses) and 
Except those who believe (in the Oneness of  whether they acquired sins, and incurred the 
Allah—Islamic Monotheism)  wrath of Allah. The poets were in such a state 
And do righteous deeds,  of confusion when Allah the Highest, to ease 
And remember Allah much,  their pain, clarified the matter for them, and 
And vindicate themselves after they have  approve  of  their  craft,  revealed  the  verses: 
been wronged.  “Except those who believe, and do righteous 
[by replying in poetry to the unjust poetry  deeds, and remember Allah much, and reply to 
which the pagan poets utter against the  the unjust poetry.” With this verse, we learn 
Muslims].  that  any  form  of  poetry,  or  oral  literature, 
And those who do wrong will come to know  wherein  the  rules  of  Islam  are  upheld, 
by what overturning they will be  becomes halal, that is, authorized. First and 
overturned.   foremost,  the  verse  shows  Muslims  that, 
(Qur’an, 26: 224-227;  Interpretation of the  whether  one  is  a  poet  or  not,  the  most 
Meanings of the Noble Qur’ân in the English  important  thing  is  to  hold  to  the  tenets  of 
Language, 2007, p. 503)  Islam  (because  even  the  forms  of  literature 
 The  Qur’an  has  its  specific  ways  of  dealing  that  are  prohibited  in  Islam  only  constitute 
with issues, presenting facts, disproving false  minor sins in this religion). The second thing in 
claims,  and  enlightening  the  reader.  In  the  order of importance is that the person ought 
case  at  hand,  the  Qur’an  first  condemns,  to do good deeds—for, good deeds erase bad 
outrightly so, all poets, by stating that ‘As for  deeds, as per this verse of the Qur’an:  ‘And 
the poets, [only] the erring follow them’, it is  establish prayer at the two ends of the day and 
only  those  people  who  are  themselves  the approach of the night. Indeed, good deeds 
deviants that follow poets, that listen to them,  do away with misdeeds. That is a reminder for 
that admire their compositions, and that are  those  who  remember.’  (Qur’an  11:114;  Al-
thereby influenced by their rumblings. Then  Mehri, 2010, p. 189)—so, even if the person 
the Qur’an goes on to substantiate its claims  engages in sinful versions of oral literature, by 
9 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

On the Demise of African Traditional Oral Literature                                                                     Bwo-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (Jarh) 4(3)” 
the good deeds that the person accomplishes,  Hell,  Hassan”  (Hawatmeh,  2017);  and,  on 
those sins would be erased by the good deeds.  another  occasion,  he  even  gave  him  glad 
Most of all, the verses show that poetry could  tidings of the paradise: “Allah will reward you 
even be used to defend Islam, God, and His  with  Paradise,  Hassan”  (Hawatmeh,  2017). 
messengers and prophets. Let us not forget  Within  the  specific  Songhay-Zarma  culture, 
that, back then, poetry was the media through  several celebrated oral poets were known to 
which  information  was  spread,  memorized,  be pious Muslims and knowledgeable scholars. 
and preserved. The traditional history as well  (Oumarou & Abdou Moumouni, 2023, p. 240) 
as the daily history of any people circulated  Colonization and the Destruction of Songhay-
through oral poetry, and ultimately, through  Zarma Society 
the various oral traditions. On this showing,  Sandra  Bornand  says:  Indeed,  with  the 
enemies of Islam  composed poems through  evolution of Zarma society, the training of the 
which they vilified Allah, His messenger, and  jacare  has  gradually  declined  so  that  today 
the Muslim community; it was, hence, the role  there is barely one left who knows the story of 
of  Muslim  poets,  to  respond  in  kind,  to  the ancestors: Jibo Baje, alias “Jeliba.” Aware 
disgrace  those  enemies  by  exposing  the  that  he  is  the  last  depository  of  the  oral 
shameful  deeds  of  their  ancestors,  by  literature of the jacare and that none of his 
attacking the paternal line of descent of any  sons would replace him, he has entrusted the 
enemy  who  is  known  to  be  an  illegitimate  author  with  the  mission  of  preserving  and 
person born out of wedlock, etc. Allah, then,  passing  on  his  repertory  to  other  cultures. 
shows  that  poets  who  are  so  inclined,  to  (2007, p. 149). Thus, do we see that it is the 
defend the honor of Islam, of the prophet, of  ‘evolution of the Zarma society’ that led to the 
the Muslims, are good poets, whose activity  abandonment of oral literature, so much so 
carries His stamp of approval, and who will be  that none of the sons of ‘Jeliba’ accepts to take 
requitted  with  the  best  possible  requital,  in  on  the  family  craft?  If  Muslim  clerics  are 
this  life,  and  in  the  hereafter.  In  this  responsible  for  the  destruction  of  oral 
connection,  Tafsir  ibn  Kathir  reports  that  in  literature,  why  is  it  that  Jeliba  continued to 
Sahih  al-Bukhary:  The  Messenger  of  Allah  practice his craft up to his death at over 80 
said to Hassan: Ridicule them in verse. Or he  years  old?  Indeed,  other  causes  must  be 
said: «Ridicule them in verse, and [angel] Jibril  sought  for  the  demise  of  oral  literature  in 
is with you [inspiring you, and protecting you  Niger; it  is  way too  easy  to  accuse  Islam  of 
by  the  permission  of  Allah].  Imam  Ahmad  being  the  culprit.  It  is  understandable  that 
recorded  that  Ka’b  bin  Malik  said  to  the  those  people  who  are  as  poorly  disposed 
Prophet:  «Allah  has  revealed  what  He  toward  religion  as  was  Nietzsche  toward 
revealed about the poets [hence I should quit  morality—such  as  Sandra  Bornand—see 
poetry]. » The Messenger of Allah said: «The  anything religious with a suspicious eye, but 
believer wages Jihad with his sword and with  these so-called Western intellectuals boast of 
his tongue, By the One in Whose Hand is my  being impartial and objective; let them, then, 
soul,  it  is  as  if  you  are attacking  them  with  show their impartiality and objectivity even in 
arrows [when you attack them in your poetry;  analyzing such things that they abhor, as the 
so,  do  not  quit].  »  (Ibn  Kathir,  2000).  religion  of  Islam  for  instance.  The  following 
Subsequently,  Hassan  disgraced  the  quote  from  the  same  Bornand  is,  on  this 
disbelievers  so  much  so,  and  praised  the  showing,  edifying:  […]  in  former  times—
Messenger and the Muslims so much so, that  before  colonization—jacare  accompanied 
the  prophet  made  a  supplication  for him  in  chiefs in all their activities and, especially, on 
these terms: “May Allah protect you against  the  battlefield  they  incited  them  to  acts  of 
10 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

On the Demise of African Traditional Oral Literature                                                                     Bwo-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (Jarh) 4(3)” 
bravery. … they played the role of arbiter in  insights: In West Africa, it was during the rule 
cases of conflict among nobles, as well as a  of Sunjata of the Mali empire (1230-1255) that 
witness among warriors, and they counseled  Islamic  poetry  flourished.  The  tradition  was 
chiefs  in  their  decision-making.  Jasare  thus  further  encouraged  by  Sunjata’s  successor, 
occupied  a  strategic  place  in  precolonial  Musa (1312-1335), who founded Timbuktu as 
Zarma  society.  …  With  the  arrival  of  a center of Islamic learning. It would reach the 
colonists … the role of the jacare was lessened  peak of its influence in the sixteenth century; 
along with the political and warrior power of  several  notable  Soninke,  Fulani,  and  Berber 
the  chiefs,  relegated  only  to  the  domain  of  poets were associated with it. Later, the jihad 
traditional ceremonies: marriages, baptisms,  of  Uthman  dan  Fodio  (1754-1817)  led  to  a 
enthronements,  and  funerals  of  chiefs.  …  spread  of  Islam  in  the  Hausa  states,  and 
colonization  also  contributed  to  the  Islamic verse forms joined with the indigenous 
breakdown of the structure of the pre-colonial  court  praise singing. (1985, p. 27; emphasis 
society as well as its ancestral knowledge. The  added).  If  all  these  statements  are  not 
jasare,  formerly  under  the  protection  of  a  sufficient to give the lie to Sandra Bornand’s 
chief, was most often then abandoned by that  accusations  against  Islam,  then  here  is 
chief,  who  no  longer  contributed  to  his  another one from Scheub: “Islamic literature 
support.  Whereas  before  colonization  the  did not long remain alien to the African artistic 
chief  was  supposed  to  clothe  and  feed  his  experience; it quickly became assimilated into 
jasare, as well as house him and arrange for  existent  poetic  traditions,  because  of  the 
his marriage, the jasare, for his part, was at  presence  in  Africa  of  like  forms”;  and  here 
the  service  of  nobles  that  he  praised  and  goes another one: “Had there been a direct 
advised.   imposition of foreign written forms on African 
Other Authorities Do Not Support Bornand’s  arts, an artificial hybrid would have been the 
Contention  result—short-lived, because it probably would 
  As  per  Harold  Scheub,  as  “Islam  began  its  have had no audience.” (1985, p. 32)  
journey”, namely in West Africa, “the inherent  The Demise of Old Art Forms is Inevitable 
adaptability  of  the  oral/literary  tradition    Isidore  Okpewho  says that  when  he  thinks 
enabled  it  to  adjust  to  the  various  cultures  about the demise of African oral literature, he 
with  which  it  came  into  contact”  with  a  cannot help remembering a statement made 
“disruption [that] was as minimal” as possible  by Amadou Hampaté-Bâ, wherein he showed 
(1985, p. 26). He goes on to say that “Islam did  that in Africa, an elderly person is akin to a 
not impose itself on the Indigenous forms so  library and that whenever s/he dies, it is as if 
much  as  blend  with  them”  and  that  “Islam  the library is set ablaze in its entirety; then 
early  showed  its  artistic  ability  to  adapt  to  Okpewho remarks that: The conflagration has 
African art.” (1985, p. 26) Indeed, according to  been going on for a long time, sadly, and there 
Lewis,  Islam  even  contributed  to  the  seems little anyone can do about what is, after 
development of African art forms: “With the  all,  a  natural  order  of  things.  African 
spread of the Arabic language and background  governments, it is true, have taken measures 
among  the  masses,  a  vast  semi-popular  to keep alive the traditions of the past through 
literature appeared, in which the history and  encouragement and even sponsorship of folk 
legends of Arabia and Islam were worked into  troupes as well as the promotion of periodic 
connected  romances  in  interspersed  prose  festivals where the best folk artists may show 
and  verse,  suitable  for  public  recitation”  their skills. But the passage of things can never 
(Scheub,  1985,  p.  26).  Scheub  agrees  with  really  be  arrested;  the  best  thing  about 
Lewis  and  goes  on  to  offer  the  following  tradition may be, indeed, that it “moves on,” 
11 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

On the Demise of African Traditional Oral Literature                                                                     Bwo-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (Jarh) 4(3)” 
maintaining its essence even while changing  scapegoat that offers justifications for events 
its outer form. (2007a, p. 1). What Okpewho  over which they do not have any power? Is it 
shows in this quote is a form of resignation:  not that they so accuse Islam of hiding their 
indeed,  what  can  one  do  about  a  natural  failures? To what extent are people so pious 
process which, in its unfolding, is inevitable?  that they always obey Islam? The events over 
But the future is not as gloomy as it appears;  which practitioners of oral literature have no 
undeniably, “survival, in one form or another,  power  are  the  following:  Western-style 
appears  to  be  the  welcome  fate  of  various  educational system, Western civilization; the 
aspects of oral tradition as we know it today.”  Westernization of African civilization; modern 
(Okpewho,  2007a,  p. 10)  Oral  literature  will  technology; modern forms of entertainment 
die,  he  continues,  sometimes  because  the  such  as  movies,  video  games,  and  music; 
venues  wherein  it  is  performed,  wherein  it  internet,  along  with  printed  books;  and  so 
flourishes and blossoms, are no longer there,  forth. These, then, are the real threats to oral 
and the verbal artists have left those venues  literature. Using Islam as a scapegoat for one’s 
in pursuit of a living elsewhere—what is one  failure amounts, on the part of an oral artist, 
to do about such a situation? (2007a, p. 11)  to  pretend  that  he  abandoned  his  craft 
“Maybe  the  genre  in  question  is  dying  out  because of religious considerations while this 
because it was closely integrated into a set of  comes from his failure to draw an audience to 
socio-economic  relations  that  have  been  his  performances—the  audience  having 
revolutionized,”  contends  Graham  Furniss;  abandoned him in favor of modern, Western-
and “what if the genre is the public expression  type,  music.  Granted,  tales  are  contrived 
of  royalty  where  the  monarchy  has  been  narratives, and Islam abhors and prohibits lies; 
overthrown,  the  performers  living  on  royal  but, have people abandoned tale-telling and 
patronage … from a ruler who is no more?”  tale-listening in obedience to Islam? If this is 
(Okpewho, 2007a, p. 11). As we are closing  the case, why is it that growing numbers of 
this section, and before we get to the next one,  Muslims,  even  pious  students  of  Islamic 
we would like to point out that our argument  studies, engage in movie watching? Granted, 
is not that Islam condones every sub-genre of  during  oral  performances,  men  and  women 
oral literature; rather, we argue that even if  freely  mix,  which  is  a  practice  opposed  by 
Islam does condemn oral literature outrightly  Islam;  but,  have  people  abandoned  such 
(and we do not mean that it does condemn  performances in obedience to Islam? If this is 
every  aspect  of  it),  to  what  extent  is  Islam  the case, then why is it that modern musicians 
responsible for the demise of this traditional  draw  a  considerable  audience  during  their 
literature?  concerts wherein men and women mix freely, 
Suppose Islam Condemns Oral Literature, to  and  fornication  and  adultery  take  place?  If 
what Extent Do Muslims Obey their Religion?  people are so pious that they abandon oral 
  After  quoting  Bornand’s  statements  at  the  literature to uphold the injunctions of Islam, 
beginning  of  this  paper,  we  stated  that  we  why is it that the broad morality of the society 
would go back to them later; herein we will  continues  to  shrink,  that  fornication  and 
deal  with  them.  Bornand  seems  to  believe  adultery are spreading in the Nigérien society, 
that  Islam  simply  must  prohibit  something,  that bars are opened every day, that most civil 
and people will obey systematically. Is it so?  servants embezzle the wealth of the country, 
Islam is accused of having contributed to the  that  almost  every  person  seeks  for  ways  to 
demise of oral literature in Africa, but to what  deceive and betray people to gain money to 
extent is Islam responsible for this situation?  which  they  are  not  entitled  rightfully?  It 
Is  it  not  that  people  simply  use  Islam  as  a  follows  that,  even  if  Islam  were  to  be  held 
12 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

On the Demise of African Traditional Oral Literature                                                                     Bwo-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (Jarh) 4(3)” 
responsible for the demise of oral literature in  market; arrogance and negative stereotypes; 
Niger, its injunctions cannot account for a tiny  the  rise  of  fake  Jesere;  and  the  failure  of 
percentage  of  the  broad  phenomenon  African governments to protect their cultural 
wherein  oral  literature  fell  into  irrelevance.  heritages. Despite all these menaces that oral 
Although  we  cannot,  at  this  stage,  give  a  literature is facing, it still resists and manages 
credible  percentage,  we  believe  that  Islam  to survive somehow. The  good news is that 
cannot be responsible for more than 1% of the  these  days  in  Niger,  graduate  and  post-
cases where oral literature disappeared or fell  graduate  students  in  the  humanities  have 
into obsolescence. With the strength of the  taken  it  upon  themselves  to  study  oral 
foregoing  arguments,  we  say  that  it  is  a bit  literature in their master’s thesis and doctoral 
dishonest to pretend that Puritan (izala) Islam  dissertations—some  of  such  students  being 
condemns oral literature to the point that it  the two authors of this article.  
leads to its demise; if such a claim, made by  References 
Bornand, were true, why is it that new forms  Al-Mehri, A. B. (Éd.). (2010). The Qur’an: With 
of  poetry,  which  Islam  approves  of,  did  not  Surah  Introductions  and  Appendices 
flourish  and  spread  in  the  four  corners  of  (Saheeh  International  Translation,  Trad.). 
Songhayland/Zarmaland? If the people were  Maktabah Booksellers and Publishers. 
so  pious  that  they  killed  the  forms  of  oral  Bornand, S. (2007). « From a Sweet-Smelling 
literature that Islam disproves, why is it that,  Mouth to a Well-Tuned Ear » : Testimony on 
in  their  extraordinary  display  of  faith  and  the  Diffusion  of  the  Repertory  of  a  Zarma 
religious zeal, they (who turned their backs on  Jasare  in  Niger  (R.  H.  Mitsch,  Trad.). 
prohibited  forms  of  oral  literature)  did  not  Research  in  African  Literatures,  38(3,), 
establish  the  forms  of  oral  (and  written)  Article  3,. 
literature that Islam approves of? The reality  http://www.jstor.org/stable/20109502 
is that all forms of oral literature are simply  Bornand, S. (2020, décembre 17). Littérature 
dying  out  in  favor  of  new  forms  which,  En  Zarma.  http://ellaf.huma-
paradoxically  so,  are  outrightly  rejected  by  num.fr/litteratures/litterature-en-zarma/ 
Islam: here we are speaking of modern music,  Dasylva, A. O. (2007). « Culture Education » 
which  is  full  of  curse  words,  promiscuous  and  the  Challenge  of  Globalization  in 
language,  sexual  suggestions,  and  which  is  Modern  Nigeria.  Oral  Tradition,  21(2), 
performed  to  the  background  of  musical  325‑341. 
instruments—most of which are downrightly  https://doi.org/10.1353/ort.2007.0001 
prohibited by Islam!  DeValve, J. R. (2018). Singing Foreign Songs in 
Conclusion  the  Lord’s  House :  An  Examination  of  the 
  Building  on  everything  presented  in  this  Worship  Music  Sung  in  Songhai/Zarma 
article  as  counter-arguments  to  Sandra  Protestant  Churches  of  the  West  African 
Bornand’s  contention  that  Islam  led  to  the  Sahel  with  Special  Reference  to  Niger. 
demise of oral literature in the Songhay-Zarma  Middlesex  University  /  Oxford  Centre  for 
culture, we hereby conclude that Islam is not  Mission Studies. 
the  only  cause,  nor  is  it  the  real  or  most  Hale, T. A. (1990). Scribe, Griot, and Novelist: 
important cause, of the obsolescence of that  Narrative  Interpreters  of  the  Songhay 
literature; rather, some of the true reasons of  Empire  Followed  by  the  Epic  of  Askia 
this demise are colonialism (and Christianity);  Mohammed  Recounted  by  Nouhou  Malio. 
Western-style African education and Western  University of Florida Press. 
culture; urbanization, modern technology and  Ḫālid, Ḫālid Muḥammad, & ʿAlīwah, ʾAbd-al-
entertainment;  modern  economy  and  job  Ḥamīd (avec Dar al-Manarah). (2003). Men & 
13 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

On the Demise of African Traditional Oral Literature                                                                     Bwo-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (Jarh) 4(3)” 
women around the messenger = Riǧāl wa- Okpewho,  I.  (2007b).  Introduction—The 
nisāʾ ḫanla ’r-Rasūl. Dar Al-Manarah.  Preservation  and  Survival  of  African  Oral 
Hawatmeh,  M.  (2017).  Hassan  bin  Thabit’s  Literature.  Research  in  African  Literatures, 
Poetry and his Belief in Allah.  38(3,),  VII‑XXI. 
Ibn Kathir, A.-F. I. (2000). Tafsir Ibn Kathir (S.- http://www.jstor.org/stable/20109491 
R. Al-Mubarakpuri, Trad.). Dar-us-Salam.  Okpewho, I. (2009). Storytelling in the African 
Ikeji, F. I. (s. d.). African Oral Literature and  World.  Journal  of  the  African  Literature 
the Challenges of the 21st Century. 6.  Association,  3(2),  Article  2. 
Interpretation of the Meanings of the Noble  http://www.tandfonline.com/action/showC
Qur’ân  in  the  English  Language :  A  itFormats?doi=10.1080/21674736.2009.116
Summarized Version of Commentaries of at- 90110 
Tabari,  Al-Qurtubi  and  Ibn  Katheer  with  Sadou,  L.,  &  Tulet,  A.  (Réalisateurs).  (2013, 
Comments from Saheeh Al-Bukhaari = Tafsīr  20).  Dialba  et  Sandra,  ou  la  Parole  Zarma 
Maʿānī  Al-Qurʾān  Al-Karīm  Bi-’L-Luġa  Al- Sauvée  [Émission].  In  Grand  Reportage. 
Inǧilīzīya (M. T.-D. I.-ʿAbd-al-Q. al-Hilālī & M.  Radio France International. 
M. Ḫān, Trad.). (2007). Maktaba Darussalam.  Saïbou  Adamou,  A.  (2008).  Expression  de 
Lawali,  M.  T.  (2021).  Socialization  in  Hausa  l’identité dans la parole de Tombokoye Tessa, 
Oral  Poetry :  A  Study  of  Sagalo’s  and  Dan  gawlo  songhay-zarma  du  Niger :  Analyse 
Anace’s  Songs  [Unpublished  Doctoral  [Unpublished  Doctoral  Dissertation]. 
Dissertation, Abdou Moumouni University].  Ouagadougou. 
https://bit.ly/3zdmhmh  Scheub, H. (1985). A Review of African Oral 
Mazrui, A. (1975). The African University as a  Traditions  and  Literature.  African  Studies 
Multinational  Corporation :  Problems  of  Review,  28(2/3),  1‑72. 
Penetration  and  Dependency.  Harvard  http://www.jstor.org/stable/524603 
Educational  Review,  45(2),  Article  2.  Sone, E. M. (2015). Swazi Oral Literature Eco-
https://doi.org/10.17763/haer.45.2.h62846 Culture and Environmental Apocalypse. 12. 
n66230j150  Sone, E. M. (2018). African Oral Literature and 
Mazrui,  A.  A.  (1968).  Some  socio-political  the Humanities : Challenges and Prospects. 
Functions  of  English  Literature  in  Africa.  Humanities,  7(2),  30. 
European Journal of Sociology, 9(2), Article 2.  https://doi.org/10.3390/h7020030 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S00039756000048 TV5MONDE (Réalisateur). (2018, April 26). Le 
60  Niger  Pleure  Le  Grand  Griot  Zarma  Djibo 
Mounkaïla,  F.,  &  Ankrom,  J.  S.  (1993).  Badjé  [Enregistrement  vidéo]. 
Ancestors from the East in Sahelo-Sudanese  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yMkEZ
Myth : Dinga Soninké, Zabarkâne Zarma, and  hMMk3A 
Others.  Research  in  African  Literatures,  Wa Thiongʾo, N. (1993a). Creating Space for a 
24(2,),  13‑21.  Hundred Flowers to Bloom : The Wealth of a 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3819882  Common  Global  Culture.  In  Moving  the 
Nwakaego,  N.  (2016).  Oral  Literature  as  a  Centre the Struggle for Cultural Freedoms. 
Spring-Board  for  Value  Inculcation  to  English Press Ltd., P.O. Box 30127, Enterprise 
Children. 10.  Road, Nairobi, Kenya. 
Ogundokun, S. A. (2015). The Role of Orature  Wa  Thiongʾo,  N.  (1993b).  Port-colonial 
in African Socio-Cultural Space. 8.  Politics & Culture. In Moving the Centre the 
Okpewho, I. (2007a). Introduction. Research  Struggle for Cultural Freedoms. English Press 
in  African  Literatures,  38(3,),  VII‑XXI.  Ltd.,  P.O.  Box  30127,  Enterprise  Road, 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/20109491  Nairobi, Kenya. 
14 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

On the Demise of African Traditional Oral Literature                                                                     Bwo-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (Jarh) 4(3)” 
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  