Two–step Input Spatial Auditory BCI for
Japanese Kana Characters
Moonjeong Chang and Tomasz M. Rutkowski(cid:63)
Life Science Center of TARA, University of Tsukuba
1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan
tomek@bci-lab.info
http://bci-lab.info/
5102 raM 01  ]CN.oib-q[  1v30920.3051:viXra
Abstract. We present an auditory stimulus optimization and a pilot
study of a two–step input speller application combined with a spatial au-
ditory brain–computer interface (saBCI) for paralyzed users. The appli-
cation has been developed for 45, out of 48 defining the full set, Japanese
kana characters in a two–step input procedure setting for an easy–to–use
BCI–speller interface. The user first selects the representative letter of
a subset, defining the second step. In the second step, the final choice
is made. At each interfacing step, the choices are classified based on the
P300 event related potential (ERP) responses captured in the EEG, as
in the classic oddball paradigm. The BCI online experiment and EEG
responses classification results of the pilot study confirm the effectiveness
of the proposed spelling method.
Key words: Brain-computer interface (BCI); P300; ERP; EEG.
1 Introduction
A brain-computer interface (BCI) is a technology that uses brainwaves only to
control a computer, or a machine, without any body muscle movements [1]. This
technology could allow disabled people, such as those suffering from locked–in
syndrome (LIS), to regain communication skills or to manage daily life support
related functions. In our research, we focus on an auditory and non–invasive
BCI modality, since it allows for an application without any training even for
the naive user.
Among the state–of–the–art BCIs, the visual modality is the most successful
because the evoked P300 responses usually have the largest amplitudes allow-
ing for the easiest classification [2]. However, it is known that some LIS users
(e.g. advanced stage amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients) cannot rely on visual
modalities because they gradually lose intentional muscle control, including eye
movements, focusing or intentional blinking. Our research hypothesis is that the
spatial auditory BCI (saBCI) [3,4] modality shall be a more suitable solution
for establishing communication with LIS users and for creating the Japanese
(cid:63) The corresponding author.

2 Moonjeong Chang and Tomasz M. Rutkowski
speller requiring at minimum the 45 characters out for 48 available for a smooth
communication. In order to do so, we propose to utilize the two–step input pro-
cedure to create an easy–to–use speller interface with a limited number of choices
(commands) in each step. We also test various auditory stimulus scenarios using
different combinations of female and male voices in the two–step input protocol.
We report results from a series of experiments in which the users were asked to
spell short Japanese words using the two–step input scenarios.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section,
we describe the online BCI experiment set–up, EEG acquisition, filtering and
classification procedures, as well as the two–step input Japanese kana characters’
speller paradigm. Then the results of the online BCI experiments are discussed
together with the P300 response latencies. Finally, conclusions are drawn and
future research directions outlined.
2 Methods
In the experiments reported in this paper, the Japanese kana character set–
based BCI–speller paradigm was investigated. The paradigm was designed to
extend our previously reported pilot study [4]. In order to improve the previ-
ous 25 characters–based paradigm, we designed the new interface as follows:
the sound stimuli of male and the female voices were introduced in various in-
put steps; “a step–back” command was added in the second step input using a
tone of 440 Hz in order to let the user to retreat from a possible error in the
first step; in the first step the number of choices was increased from five to ten
(see Figure 1). In order to create the spatial sound images with stimuli coming
from distinct locations known to the user, we tested the following combinations.
We used the sound stimulus patterns as follows: only the female voice modality
with the same vocalization presented in the both input steps; male → female
voices modality in the first and second steps, respectively; female → male voices
modality with an opposite set–up to the previous one. The speech occurrences
Fig.1. A diagram of the proposed two step Japanese kana characters input
procedure.

Two–step Input Spatial Auditory BCI for Japanese Kana Characters 3
were adopted from a sound dataset constructed of male and female natural voice
recordings available for research purposed from [5]. We used the sound stimuli
of 45 Japanese kana characters. The auditory stimuli were delivered from the
ten distinct spatial locations using loudspeakers positioned in two horizontal
lines in front of the user’s head. The five loudspeakers were at the user ears’
level and the remaining five in a line one meter above. In order to manage the
spatial sounds distributions and precise presentations to evoke the time aligned
P300 responses an in–house multimedia application was developed in MAX en-
vironment [6]. The MAX application communicated with the in–house extended
EEG acquisition, filtering and classification environment BCI2000 [7] using an
UDP network protocol. We conducted the online EEG experiments in order to
verify a possibility to input the set of Japanese kana characters of the proposed
spatial auditory BCI (saBCI) speller paradigm. We tested whether there were
significant differences in accuracies among the proposed spatial sound stimulus
patterns. In the experiments, ten healthy users took part (mean age of 24.0
years old, standard deviation of 0.63 years). The online (real–time) EEG ex-
periments were conducted in accordance with the WMA Declaration of Helsinki
- Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects. The pro-
cedures were approved and designed in agreement with the ethical committee
guidelines of the Faculty of Engineering, Information and Systems at University
of Tsukuba, Japan. Each user first conducted a short psychophysical test with
a button press behavioral response to confirm understanding of the experimen-
tal set–up. Next, the EEG online BCI protocol experiments were conducted. In
the EEG experiments, each user was instructed to spell a sequence of Japanese
kana characters presented in random order as in the classical P300 response
based oddball paradigm [1]. The following two types of experimental sessions
were performed for each user in the EEG experiments: training session - using
only the five Japanese vowels (a, i, u, e, and o) in a simple single–step–spelling
set–up in order to train a stepwise linear discriminant analysis (SWLDA) classi-
fier [8] to discriminate the P300 responses (a binary classification mode of target
versus non–target brainwave evoked responses); a copy spelling test session - to
test online the two–step–input Japanese kana characters speller paradigm. As
a task in the test experiment four Japanese words (ho–ta–ru, na–ma–e, fu–ne–
o–mo–tu and shi–ra–yu–ki–hi–me) were spelled by the users. During the online
BCI experiments, the EEG signals were captured with eight active electrodes
g.LADYbird by g.tec medical instruments GmbH, Austria. The electrodes were
connected to an EEG amplifier vAmp by Brain Products GmbH, Germany. The
electrodes were attached to the following head locations Cz, CPz, P3, P4, Cp5,
Cp6 F3 and F4, as in the 10/10 extended international system. The ground and
reference electrodes were attached at FCz and the left earlobe head locations
respectively. The captured online EEG signals were processed by the in–house
enhanced BCI2000 application [9] using SWLDA classifier with features drawn
from 0 ∼ 800 ms ERP intervals. The sampling frequency was set to 500 Hz,
a high–pass filter at 0.1 Hz and the low–pass filter at 40 Hz, with an electric
power line interference rejection notch filter set in a band of 48 ∼ 52 Hz to avoid

4 Moonjeong Chang and Tomasz M. Rutkowski
sub–harmonic interferences. The sound stimuli were presented randomly with an
inter–stimulus–interval (ISI) set to 300 ms. Each sound stimulus had length of
300 ms either. The brainwave response signals (ERPs) in each classification step
were averaged 20 times (in the classifier training sessions) and only 10 times (in
the testing two–step–input spelling paradigm).
3 Results
The psychophysical experiments conducted with all the ten users confirmed no
significant differences among the behavioral reaction times (button presses) to
the used spatial stimuli. The EEG experiments conducted with the ten par-
ticipating users with the proposed Japanese kana characters in two–step–input
speller using spatial auditory BCI paradigm have been reported below. The
obtained grand mean averaged ERP responses from the ten users has been de-
picted in Figure 2. The P300 responses have been clearly depicted for targets
(purple lines) in the ranges of 350 ∼ 600 ms. The grand mean averaged result
Fig.2. The grand mean averaged ERP brain responses of all users participating
in the reported online two–step–input BCI–speller experiments collected within
the training sessions. The purple middle (mean) lines depict the ERPs to tar-
gets (note the clear P300 positive deflections after about 350 ms and lasting
till about 900 ms in this study). The blue lines represent the non–targets av-
eraged brainwaves, respectively. Normalized standard errors are depicted with
light color intervals surrounding the mean responses.

Two–step Input Spatial Auditory BCI for Japanese Kana Characters 5
Table 1. Spelling accuracies of the two–step–input Japanese characters
paradigm obtained from the online BCI experiments with a theoretical chance
level of 1.7%. The averaged scores were 42.76%,31.77% and 28.78%, for female,
male → female and female → male voice patterns, respectively.
User number Voice pattern First step accuracy Final (second step) accuracy
female 53.0% 53.0%
#1 male → female 23.5% 5.9%
female → male 35.3% 17.6%
female 17.6% 0.0%
#2 male → female 11.8% 5.9%
female → male 0.0% 0.0%
female 53.0% 53.0%
#3 male → female 76.5% 47.1%
female → male 53.0% 53.0%
female 0.0% 33.3%
#4 male → female 23.5% 17.6%
female → male 11.8% 5.9%
female 70.6% 47.1%
#5 male → female 76.5% 17.6%
female → male 82.4% 64.7%
female 47.1% 35.3%
#6 male → female 35.3% 23.5%
female → male 47.1% 23.5%
female 76.5% 76.5%
#7 male → female 70.6% 53.0%
female → male 35.3% 23.5%
female 82.4% 70.6%
#8 male → female 94.1% 82.4%
female → male 82.4% 64.7%
female 29.4% 23.5%
#9 male → female 47.1% 23.5%
female → male 35.3% 23.1%
female 47.1% 35.3%
#10 male → female 53.0% 41.2%
female → male 41.2% 11.8%
confirmed the validity of the proposed saBCI–speller paradigm settings and con-
figuration. The clear P300 responses in comparison to the non–targets (blue lines
in Figure 2) validated the possibility to discriminate those ERPs using machine
learning approaches and especially the proposed application of the SWLDA. The
Japanese kana characters set in two–step–input spelling accuracy results of the
ten participating users are summarized in Table 1. The scores of the users’ major-
ity were above the two–step–input BCI–speller theoretical chance level of 1.7%.
The female, male → female and female → male stimulus modalities resulted with
non–significant differences of means as tested with the pairwise t-tests. The ten
tested saBCI–speller users reported preferences for the mixed male and female
voice patterns due to more easy orientation in the two–step interface. The re-
sults of the conducted online EEG experiments have shown the feasibility of the

| User number   | Voice pattern   | First step accuracy   | Final (second step) accuracy   |
|:--------------|:----------------|:----------------------|:-------------------------------|
| #1            | female          | 53.0%                 | 53.0%                          |
|               | male → female   | 23.5%                 | 5.9%                           |
|               | female → male   | 35.3%                 | 17.6%                          |
| #2            | female          | 17.6%                 | 0.0%                           |
|               | male → female   | 11.8%                 | 5.9%                           |
|               | female → male   | 0.0%                  | 0.0%                           |
| #3            | female          | 53.0%                 | 53.0%                          |
|               | male → female   | 76.5%                 | 47.1%                          |
|               | female → male   | 53.0%                 | 53.0%                          |
| #4            | female          | 0.0%                  | 33.3%                          |
|               | male → female   | 23.5%                 | 17.6%                          |
|               | female → male   | 11.8%                 | 5.9%                           |
| #5            | female          | 70.6%                 | 47.1%                          |
|               | male → female   | 76.5%                 | 17.6%                          |
|               | female → male   | 82.4%                 | 64.7%                          |
| #6            | female          | 47.1%                 | 35.3%                          |
|               | male → female   | 35.3%                 | 23.5%                          |
|               | female → male   | 47.1%                 | 23.5%                          |
| #7            | female          | 76.5%                 | 76.5%                          |
|               | male → female   | 70.6%                 | 53.0%                          |
|               | female → male   | 35.3%                 | 23.5%                          |
| #8            | female          | 82.4%                 | 70.6%                          |
|               | male → female   | 94.1%                 | 82.4%                          |
|               | female → male   | 82.4%                 | 64.7%                          |
| #9            | female          | 29.4%                 | 23.5%                          |
|               | male → female   | 47.1%                 | 23.5%                          |
|               | female → male   | 35.3%                 | 23.1%                          |
| #10           | female          | 47.1%                 | 35.3%                          |
|               | male → female   | 53.0%                 | 41.2%                          |
|               | female → male   | 41.2%                 | 11.8%                          |

6 Moonjeong Chang and Tomasz M. Rutkowski
Japanese kana characters set in two–step–input saBCI–speller paradigm. Also
we confirmed that the accuracy of each modality had no significant differences.
A video documenting the online saBCI–speller experiment is available at [10].
4 Conclusions
In this paper, we reported the results obtained with a two step input Japanese
syllabary saBCI–speller paradigm using 45 Japanese kana characters allowing
for a smooth syllabary–based communication.
The results obtained allowed the ten participating users to spell short words
using two steps, as reported in the Table 1. The mean results of all the users were
above the theoretical chance level of the proposed two–step–input saBCI–speller.
However, zero accuracies were also observed at sporadic cases. The preliminary
yet encouraging results presented call for more research into two–step input
spatial auditory BCI–speller paradigms. The next research steps will include
the spatial auditory stimulus optimization for handicapped or bedridden sub-
jects, who cannot utilize a full surround sound acoustic environment. We plan
to continue this line of research in order to apply the method in the online BCI
application for patients suffering from locked–in syndrome.
References
1. Wolpaw, J., Winter Wolpaw, E., eds.: Brain-Computer Interfaces: Principles and
Practice. Oxford University Press (2012)
2. Chang, M., Nishikawa, N., Struzik, Z.R., Mori, K., Makino, S., Mandic, D.,
Rutkowski, T.M.: Comparison of P300 responses in auditory, visual and audiovisual
spatial speller BCI paradigms. In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Brain-
Computer Interface Meeting 2013, Asilomar Conference Center, Pacific Grove, CA
USA, Graz University of Technology Publishing House, Austria (June 3-7, 2013)
Article ID: 156
3. Rutkowski, T.M., Cichocki, A., Mandic, D.P.: Spatial auditory paradigms for brain
computer/machine interfacing. In: International Workshop On The Principles and
Applications of Spatial Hearing 2009 (IWPASH 2009) - Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Workshop, Miyagi-Zao Royal Hotel, Sendai, Japan (November 11-13, 2009)
P5
4. Chang, M., Mori, K., Makino, S., Rutkowski, T.M.: Spatial auditory two-step
input japanese syllabary brain-computer interface speller. In: Procedia Technology.
Volume 18. (2014) 25–31
5. Amano, S., Sakamoto, S., Kondo, T., Suzuki, Y.: NTT-Tohoku University familiar-
ity controlled word lists (FW03). Speech resources consortium, National Institute
of Informatics, Japan (2006)
6. http://cycling74.com/: Max 6 (2012)
7. Schalk, G., Mellinger, J.: A Practical Guide to Brain–Computer Interfacing with
BCI2000. Springer-Verlag London Limited (2010)
8. Krusienski, D.J., Sellers, E.W., Cabestaing, F., Bayoudh, S., McFarland, D.J.,
Vaughan, T.M., Wolpaw, J.R.: A comparison of classification techniques for the
P300 speller. Journal of Neural Engineering 3(4) (2006) 299

Two–step Input Spatial Auditory BCI for Japanese Kana Characters 7
9. Matsumoto., Y., Makino, S., Mori, K., Rutkowski, T.M.: Classifying P300 re-
sponses to vowel stimuli for auditory brain-computer interface. In: Signal and
Information Processing Association Annual Summit and Conference (APSIPA),
2013 Asia-Pacific. (2013) 1–5 Paper ID 388.
10. Rutkowski, T.M.: Japanese kana character spatial auditory BCI speller. YouTube
video available from: http://youtu.be/BY1kSqh1NEY.