This is first version sent to the journal for consideration. The final version is 
published in  
Simpson, K., Adams, D., Bruck, S., & Keen, D. (2019). Investigating the participation of children 
on the autism spectrum across home, school, and community: A longitudinal study. Child: 
Care, Health and Development. doi.org/10.1111/cch.12679 
Title Investigating the participation of children with autism across home and community: A 
longitudinal study. 
Authors 
Kate Simpson1,2, Dawn Adams1,2, Susan Bruck2,3,4 & Deb Keen1,2 
1 Autism Centre of Excellence, School of Education and Professional Studies, Griffith 
University, Australia 
2 Cooperative Research Centre for Living with Autism (Autism CRC), Australia 
3 Autism Spectrum Australia (Aspect), Australia 
4 School of Medicine, Griffith University, Australia 
 
Corresponding author: 
Kate Simpson, Autism Centre of Excellence, School of Education and Professional Studies, 
Griffith University, Brisbane, QLD 4122, Australia 
Email: k.simpson@griffith.edu.au. Telephone: +61 (07) 38821513 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Background 
The World Health Organisation recognises that meaningful participation in one’s community 
empowers individuals. Children and adolescents on the autism spectrum consistently report 
lower participation than their typical peers in activities and this appears to continue into 
adulthood. The aim of this study was to investigate the participation of children on the autism 
spectrum over a 3-year period across home, school, and community.  
Method 
Caregivers of 84 participants aged 9 – 10 years at Year 1 completed the Participation and 
Environment Measure for Children and Youth (PEM-CY) at three annual data collection 
points. The PEM-CY is a 25-question measure of the child’s level of involvement in home, 
school, and community activities. Distribution frequencies were calculated for each time 
point. 
Results  
Although participation in the majority of items across home, school and community remained 
stable, the longitudinal data suggests that children change the types of socialising activities 
across time. Over the 3 years there was a decline in physical activity (both organised and 
unstructured) and in participation in school activities.  
Conclusion 
This decline in participation as children move into adolescence is concerning. Further, 
reduced participation at this phase of development may potentially limit future participation 

opportunities throughout adolescence and into adulthood. Further exploration of the 
participation trajectories of children on the autism spectrum is needed. 
 
 
Key messages  
•  Participation in activities is related to a person’s health and well being  
•  Investigation of participation patterns in children on the autism spectrum report 
changes across time  
•  Over a three-year period, there was a decrease in the frequency of participation in 
physical activities and a shift in participation in types of socialising activities 
•  Reduced participation over time may limit opportunities to contribute to decisions 
affecting personal well-being. 
   

Introduction 
Participation in life activities is viewed as important for a person’s long-term health and well-
being (World Health Organization, 2007). Participation is viewed as a multidimensional 
construct with attendance and involvement identified as the key elements (Imms et al., 2016; 
Imms et al., 2017). Comparative research exploring the participation patterns in children who 
do and do not have a diagnosis on the autism spectrum repeatedly report lower participation 
patterns in children and youth on the autism spectrum and this appears consistent across time 
(Askari et al., 2014; Egilson, Jakobsdóttir, & Ólafsdóttir, 2017a; Taheri, Perry, & Minnes, 
2016). Emerging findings suggest participation in life activities may not only be 
quantitatively but also qualitatively different for children on the autism spectrum.  
Comparative studies have identified qualitative differences in participation patterns of 
children on the autism spectrum and their non-autistic peers. For example, children are more 
involved in computer and video games than their peers (Egilson, Jakobsdóttir, and Ólafsdóttir 
(2017b) but participate less in social media or socially interative video games (Mazurek & 
Wenstrup, 2013). Differences in participation patterns have also be reported in school 
activities, with children on the autism spectrum as involved as their peers in activities with 
less social demands although they frequented these activities more often (Falkmer, Oehlers, 
Granlund, & Falkmer, 2015). These differences may be associated with the characteristic 
differences in social communication, and restricted and repetitive patterns of behaviours and 
interests in autism (American Psychiatric Association, 2013) interacting with the 
environment to create differences or challenges in desire or ability to participate in activities. 
In general, research has suggested that more frequent participation in a more diverse range of 
activities is a better or a more desirable outcome. However, research is needed to determine 
whether this is also the case for children on the autism spectrum. Research into the specific 
nature of participation for children on the autism spectrum and how this may change over 
time could offer useful insights. 
Cross-sectional studies with children on the autism spectrum at multiple ages have 
provided some insight into potential developmental trajectories of participation. Simpson, 

Keen, Adams, Alston-Knox, and Roberts (2018) identified specific differences in 
participation patterns in two age cohorts (5, and 9 – 10 years). Parents reported higher 
frequency and involvement trends in indoor play activities in younger children, and in 
socialising using technology in older children. Older children more frequently participated in 
jobs/chore activities and organised skill activities. In a large population study, Ratcliff, Hong, 
and Hilton (2018) investigated leisure participation trajectories in children on the autism 
spectrum (n = 823) and children who did not have a diagnosis on the autism spectrum (n = 
34,457) in five age cohorts (6 – 17 years). There was a shift in participation levels around 11 
years of age with adolescents on the autism spectrum (11-17 years) reporting significantly 
lower levels of participation compared to their non-autistic peers in physical activities, jobs 
and chores, and skill activities, but no significant difference in participation levels on 
recreational activities. Interestingly, participation in social activities remained stable in 
children aged 6 – 15 years with a significant decrease only reported in 16 – 17-year-olds on 
the autism spectrum. This increased disparity in leisure participation in children and youth on 
the autism spectrum as they age appears to continue into adulthood (Myers, Davis, Stobbe, & 
Bjornson, 2015). 
To date, research findings from cross-sectional studies have indicated disparity in 
participation for individuals on the autism spectrum compared to their peers. Little is known 
about the trajectory of participation across time and settings and what is known is drawn from 
studies comparing multiple age groups at a single point in time. This is a significant 
limitation, as participation is influenced by personal and external factors, both of which are 
very sensitive to cohort effects inherent in cross-sectional studies. Exploring longitudinal 
participation trajectories in individuals controls for some of these issues. The study reported 
here investigates the participation (measured by frequency and involvement) in activities of 
children on the autism spectrum over a 3-year period (Y1, Y2, Y3) across home, school, and 
community. The specific research question that was posed was: 
1.  Does the participation of children on the autism spectrum fluctuate in the home, 
school, and/or community across a 3-year period? 

Method 
Data used in this study were drawn from <removed for blind review>, a cross-sequential 
cohort study focusing on child participation and educational outcomes for children on the 
autism spectrum. The full recruitment procedure for the larger study is described in <removed 
for blind review>. Briefly, parents or caregivers of children on the autism spectrum aged 4 – 
5 or 9 – 10 years were recruited through clinics and social media advertisements. Once 
enrolled, they were invited to complete an annual questionnaire pack. Data from Y1 have 
been reported <removed for blind review>; however, this study reports on a smaller 
subsample of children from the older cohort only, who have participation data across the first 
3 years of the sequential study. Ethical approval for this study was obtained from 
participating universities and health authorities.  
Participants 
Participants were selected for this study from the older cohort of the larger cross-sequential 
sample if they met the following two criteria: (a) a confirmed community diagnosis of autism 
or a score above the cut-off of ≥15 on the Lifetime Social Communication Questionnaire 
(SCQ; Rutter, Bailey, Berument, Lord, & Pickles, 2003); and (b) completed at least 75% of 
the PEM-CY questions (see measures) at all three data collection points. This resulted in 84 
participants; demographics of both children and their caregivers from initial data collection 
point (Y1) are shown in Table 1. There were no significant differences between participants 
included in this sample and those who did not meet the inclusion critieria on child gender (χ2 
(1, n = 133) = .02, p = .89, phi = -.012), medical condition (χ2 (1, n = 130) = .001, p = .98, phi 
= .002), caregiver age (U = 1960 , p = .61), caregiver education (U = 1861, p = .41), and 
family income (U = 1704, p = .14).  
<Table 1. Child and Caregiver Characteristics at Y1goes about here> 

Age range and mean for the children at each data collection point was Y1 (Mage 
119.17 months, SD 7.62 months), Y2 (Mage 132.92 months, SD 6.58 months), and Y3 (Mage 
144.65 months, SD 7.75 months). 
The child ratio of males to females was 3.7:1, which reflects a slightly higher 
proportion of males than that expected, given recently published rates of approximately 3.3:1 
(Loomes, Hull, & Mandy, 2017). In addition, more than 50% of children had another medical 
condition or disability, including attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (n = 23, 27.4%), 
anxiety (n = 7, 8%), asthma and allergies (n = 4, 4.7%), and epilepsy (n = 2, 2.4%). The 
questionnaires were completed predominantly by mothers. The majority of caregivers had a 
tertiary education, and more than half reported a family income above $80,000. For 
reference, the 2016 Australian Census reported the median Australian annual family income 
to be AUD $90,168. 
Participation measure 
Caregivers completed the PEM-CY (Coster et al., 2011) at three annual data collection time 
points. The PEM-CY is a caregiver-report measure of participation and environment of 
children and youth and includes 25 questions about participation in activities across home (10 
items), school (5 items), and community (10 items). Caregivers rate the frequency of 
participation on an 8-point scale (from never = 0 to daily = 7), and level of involvement on a 
5-point scale (minimally involved = 1 to very involved =5). If caregivers rated a 0 (never) for 
frequency, they did not provide a rating on the involvement scale. Questions on caregivers’ 
desire for change and environment were not considered for this study. Test-retest reliability is 
reported to be moderate for the school setting (0.58), and good for home and community 
(0.84 and 0.79 respectively) (Coster et al., 2011). In the current study the Cronbach alpha 
coefficient for attending was reported across time (Y1, Y2, Y3) for home (.70, .66, .69), 
school (.42, .38, .28), and community (.61, .60, .65).  
Data analysis  

Data were explored using R Statistical Software. The skew or kurtosis did not reflect 
a normal distribution. To explore the data over time, median and quartile graphs were used to 
illustrate the distribution of scores across each item.  
Results 
Distribution frequencies for each PEM-CY item, at each time point, are presented for home 
(Figure 1), school (Figure 2), and community (Figure 3). The median score for each item is 
illustrated with a dot. This value represents the score which has 50% of the data both above 
and below it. The solid line represents the middle 20% of the data (quantiles 40% and 60%). 
On occasion, the median may coincide with one or both quantiles. In such a case, the line will 
be non-symmetrical about the median or obscured completely. These situations represent data 
that are heavily distributed around a particular score. The dashed lines represent the 
interquartile range, which is the middle 50% of the data (quantiles 25% and 75%). As with 
the previous solid segment, it can be obscured by the median or middle 20% quartile range in 
cases of high data distribution around a particular score. The fine dotted line represents the 
95% range over which all scores are distributed. 
<Figure1 goes about here> 
<Figure2 goes about here> 
<Figure3 goes about here> 
 
 
 
Home participation (Figure 1) 
All home items across Y1, Y2, Y3 were completed 96% of the participants. Across time, 
there was a relatively stable pattern of frequency for home activities with slight differences in 
median values between time periods. In Y2 there was an increase in median value on “Indoor 
play and games” to daily (Mdn = 7), and a decrease in median value on “school preparation” 

| Distribution frequencies for each PEM-CY item, at each time point, are presented for home      |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| (Figure 1), school (Figure 2), and community (Figure 3). The median score for each item is     |
| illustrated with a dot. This value represents the score which has 50% of the data both above   |
| and below it. The solid line represents the middle 20% of the data (quantiles 40% and 60%).    |
| On occasion, the median may coincide with one or both quantiles. In such a case, the line will |
| be non-symmetrical about the median or obscured completely. These situations represent data    |
| that are heavily distributed around a particular score. The dashed lines represent the         |
| interquartile range, which is the middle 50% of the data (quantiles 25% and 75%). As with      |
| the previous solid segment, it can be obscured by the median or middle 20% quartile range in   |
| cases of high data distribution around a particular score. The fine dotted line represents the |
| 95% range over which all scores are distributed.                                               |

to a few times a week (Mdn = 6). In Y3, “getting together with other people” decreased on 
median frequency (Mdn = 6), while “socialising using technology” increased on median 
frequency to at least once a week (Mdn = 5) when compared with a few times a month in 
both Y1 and Y2 (Mdn = 4). In Y3, median values for involvement increased for “personal 
care” (Mdn = 4) and “school preparation” (Mdn = 3) and there was less spread of 
involvement on “homework”. At each time period, children were reported to attend daily 
(Mdn = 7) and be very involved (Mdn = 5) in “computer and video games” and “watching 
TV, videos, and DVDs”. 
School participation (Figure 2) 
Between 75 – 80% of the participants completed all items within the school subscale across 
Y1 - Y3. Based on the median frequency, there was an overall tendency for children to 
“attend school” daily (Mdn = 7) and to be “somewhat involved” (Mdn = 3) and to never 
participate in “special roles at school” (Mdn = 0). The children who participated in “special 
roles at school” were most involved at Y2 (Mdn = 4). Fewer children frequented “school 
teams, clubs and organisations” at Y2 and Y3 (Mdn = 0); however, they were more involved 
at Y2 (Mdn = 4) compared with Y1 (Mdn = 3) and Y3 (Mdn = 3). This increased involvement 
at Y2 was also reported on “field trips and school events” (Mdn = 4). Y3 “get together with 
peers outside of class” decreased on median frequency (Mdn = 6) with children being more 
involved in this item at Y3 (Mdn = 4) compared with Y1 and Y2 (both Mdn = 3). 
Community participation (Figure 3) 
At least 90% of the participants completed all the community items across the three time 
periods. Across time, parents reported a low frequency score (Mdn = 0) on “classes and 
lessons”, “organisations, groups, clubs, and volunteer of leadership activities”, “religious or 
spiritual gatherings”, and “working for pay”. There was a change in the proportion of 
children involved in “classes and lessons” across Y1, Y2, and Y3 (31%, 28%, 41%), with at 
least 50% of children frequenting these activities being more than somewhat involved (Mdn = 
4). Across time, children most often frequented (Mdn = 5) and were somewhat involved 
(Mdn = 3) in “neighbourhood outings”. In Y3, there was a decrease in children’s reported 

participation in “unstructured physical activities” on both median frequency (Mdn = 4) and 
median involvement (Mdn = 4). Across Y1, Y2, and Y3 there was a change in the proportion 
of children attending “organised physical activities” (74%, 58%, 49% respectively); however, 
there was an increase in involvement with over 60% of children in Y3 being at least 
somewhat involved in the activity, compared with 50% at Y1. 
Discussion  
This is the first study, to our knowledge, to document the longitudinal participation patterns 
of children (9 – 12 years) on the autism spectrum across home, school, and community using 
the PEM-CY. Longitudinal methodology, such as that employed within this study, reduces 
the potential personal and social cohort biases that can easily influence patterns of 
participation. The participation profiles of children on the autism spectrum over the 3-year 
period changes in specific items across contexts, particularly socialising and physical activity 
related items.  
Socialising  
Children at Y3 reported to get together with other people across contexts less frequently than 
reported at Y1 and Y2. This decline with increasing age in overall social participation is in 
contrast with the findings from Ratcliff et al. (2018) who reported a generally stable pattern 
of social activities participation between ages 6 – 15 years. Ratcliff et al.’s findings were 
based on a composite score and as such may not have reflected participation changes within 
types of social activities as reported in this study. They did, however, conduct further analysis 
on the social item “clubs/organisations after school” and, when controlling for personal and 
environmental factors, found participation levels only dropped significantly in 16 – 17-year-
olds on the spectrum. In contrast, findings from this study identified low levels of 
participation (<20%) on this item across the three time periods, with the majority of children 
never attending this activity. These results highlight that, even at a young age, some children 
on the autism spectrum do not participate in organised social activities, which may be 
influenced by personal or environmental factors.  

There were two social activities where participation appeared to increase with age. 
There was an increase in attending “overnight visits or trips” (Community: Y2, Y3), possibly 
due to older children having more opportunities to participate in these activities, and an 
increased frequency and involvement on “socialising using technology” (Home: Y3). The 
increase in socialising using technology is not surprising, as this appears to be consistent with 
teen behaviour (Mazurek & Wenstrup, 2013). Whilst some research has suggested that 
socialising using technology may reduce the anxiety of face-to-face interactions, emerging 
research has highlighted that socialising using technologies may create unique anxieties 
related to their online experience (van Schalkwyk et al., 2017). This highlights the 
importance of exploring activities in terms of their unique barriers and facilitators to fully 
understand the experience of participation for individuals on the autism spectrum.  
Physical activities 
The decline in participation in physical activities (organised and unstructured) with age is 
consistent with previous research on children on the autism spectrum (Jones et al., 2017; 
Ratcliff et al., 2018) and their typically developing peers (Dumith, Gigante, Domingues, & 
Kohl, 2011). There was a decrease in the number of children involved in organised physical 
activities from Y1 (n = 51; 60.7%) to Y3 (n = 39; 46.4%). The nature and culture of group 
and team programs has been identified as a restricting influence on the involvement of 
children on the autism spectrum in organised activities (see review by Askari et al., 2014). By 
Y3 the median frequency for attending organised physical activities had decreased to never 
and unstructured physical activities decreased to a few times a month. The decrease in 
participation is more commonly reported in older children (Dumith et al., 2011; Jones et al., 
2017) and raises concerns for the long-term physical activity and health of children on the 
spectrum.  
School participation  
Across Y1-Y3, children were reported to be only somewhat involved in classroom activities. 
This appears to be consistent with involvement levels of younger children (5 years) on the 

autism spectrum (Simpson et al., 2018), but lower than involvement levels reported for 
children with disabilities and children who are developing typically (Coster et al., 2013). 
Furthermore, the decrease in internal consistency on the school subscale would suggest a 
disparity in the school experiences for children on the autism spectrum as they develop. This 
may be influenced not only by the heterogeneity of the child population but also by the 
availability of opportunities to attend activities in the school context. The results also need 
considering in relation to school trajectories; in Y2 there was an increase in reported 
involvement in “special roles at school”, “school teams, clubs and organisations”, and “field 
trips and school events”, which for many children, would have coincided with their last year 
of primary school where involvement in special roles and school activities is promoted.  
Limitations and future research  
Participation is a multicomponent construct and although this study reported on attendance 
and involvement it did not address factors which may have influenced levels of participation. 
Furthermore, information was caregiver reported and involvement, a subjective experience, 
may not be easily observed. Exploring participation from the child’s perspective and 
investigating personal and external influences on participation would further add to the 
understanding of how to support meaningful participation.  
The data were collected over three time points across a 3-year period. In at least one 
time point, more than 20% of participants did not provide data for the school component. The 
reason for this is not clear but parents may feel less able to report what happens at school than 
at home where they can directly observe their child. Regardless, given the difficulties that 
children on the spectrum often encounter at school (Roberts & Simpson, 2016), it is 
recommended that future studies consider ways of increasing parent reporting. 
Conclusion  
This is the first longitudinal study to explore the participation trajectories of children 
on the autism spectrum during the important developmental period of approaching and 
entering adolescence as well as moving from primary to secondary education. The item-level 
analysis contributes to the literature by revealing specific patterns of changes over time 

across home, school, and community. Studying participation behaviours over a longer period 
would further understanding of participation trajectories of children on the autism spectrum 
and factors associated with participation patterns across time. 
 
   

References 
Adair, B., Ullenhag, A., Rosenbaum, P., Granlund, M., Keen, D., & Imms, C. (2018). 
Measures used to quantify participation in childhood disability and their alignment 
with the family of participation-related constructs: A systematic review. 
Developmental Medicine and Child Neurology. doi:10.1111/dmcn.13959 
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual (5th ed.). 
(DSM-5). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing. 
Askari, S., Anaby, D., Bergthorson, M., Majnemer, A., Elsabbagh, M., & Zwaigenbaum, L. 
(2014). Participation of children and youth with autism spectrum disorder: A scoping 
review. Review Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 2(1), 103. 
doi:10.1007/s40489-014-0040-7 
Coster, W., Bedell, G., Law, M., Khetani, M. A., Teplicky, R., Lilfenquist, K., . . . Kao, Y.-C. 
(2011). Psychometric evaluation of the participation and environment measure for 
children and youth. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 53(11), 1030-1037. 
doi:10.1111/j.1469-8749.2011.04094.x 
Coster, W., Law, M., Bedell, G., Liljenquist, K., Kao, Y. C., Khetani, M., & Teplicky, R. 
(2013). School participation, supports and barriers of students with and without 
disabilities. Child: Care, Health and Development, 39(4), 535-543. 
doi:10.1111/cch.12046 
Dumith, S., Gigante, D., Domingues, M., & Kohl, H. I. (2011). Physical activity change 
during adolescence: A systematic review and a pooled analysis. Internatinal Journal 
of Epidemiology, 40, 685-698. doi:10.1093/ije/dyq272 
Egilson, S. T., Jakobsdóttir, G., & Ólafsdóttir, L. B. (2017a). Community participation and 
environment of children with and without autism spectrum disorder: Parent 
perspectives. Scandinavian Journal of Educational Research, 24(3), 187-196. 
doi:10.1080/11038128.2016.1198419 
Egilson, S. T., Jakobsdóttir, G., & Ólafsdóttir, L. B. (2017b). Parent perspectives on home 
participation of high-functioning children with autism spectrum disorder compared 

with a matched group of children without autism spectrum disorder. Autism. 
doi:10.1177/13623613166855 
Falkmer, M., Oehlers, K., Granlund, M., & Falkmer, T. (2015). Can you see it too? Observed 
and self-rated participation in mainstream schools in students with and without autism 
spectrum disorders. Developmental Neurorehabilitation, 18(6), 365-374. 
doi:10.3109/17518423.2013.850751 
Imms, C., Adair, B., Keen, D., Ullenhag, A., Rosenbaum, P., & Granlund, M. (2016). 
‘Participation’: A systematic review of language, definitions, and constructs used in 
intervention research with children with disabilities. Developmental Medicine & Child 
Neurology, 58(1), 29-38. doi:10.1111/dmcn.12932 
Imms, C., Granlund, M., Wilson, P. H., Steenbergen, B., Rosenbaum, P. L., Gordon, A. 
M., . . . Högskolan för lärande och, k. (2017). Participation, both a means and an end: 
A conceptual analysis of processes and outcomes in childhood disability. 
Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 59(1), 16-25. doi:10.1111/dmcn.13237 
Jones, R., Downing, K., Rinehart, N., Barnett, L., May, T., McGillivray, J., . . . Hinkley, T. 
(2017). Physical activity, sedentary behavior and their correlates in children with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder: A systematic review. PLoS one, 12(1), e0172482. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0172482 
Loomes, R., Hull, L., & Mandy, W. P. L. (2017). What is the male-to-female ratio in autism 
spectrum disorder? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of the American 
Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 56(6), 466-474. 
doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2017.03.013. 
Mazurek, M. O., & Wenstrup, C. (2013). Television, video game and social media use among 
children with ASD and typically developing siblings. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders, 43(6), 1258-1271. doi:10.1007/s10803-012-1659-9 
Myers, E., Davis, B. E., Stobbe, G., & Bjornson, K. (2015). Community and social 
participation among individuals with autism spectrum disorder transitioning to 

adulthood. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 45(8), 2373-2381. 
doi:10.1007/s10803-015-2403-z 
Ratcliff, K., Hong, I., & Hilton, C. (2018). Leisure participation patterns for school age youth 
with autism spectrum disorders: Findings from the 2016 National Survey of 
Children’s Health. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders. 
doi:10.1007/s10803-018-3643-5 
Roberts, J., & Simpson, K. (2016). A review of research into stakeholders perspectives on 
inclusion of students with autism in mainstream schools. International Journal of 
Inclusive Education, 20, 1084-1096, doi:10.1080/13603116.2016.1145267. 
Rutter, M., Bailey, A., Berument, S., Lord, C., & Pickles, A. (2003). Social communication 
questionnaire. Los Angeles, CA: Western Psychological Services. 
Simpson, K., Keen, D., Adams, D., Alston-Knox, C., & Roberts, J. (2018). Participation of 
children on the autism spectrum in home, school and community. Child: Care, Health 
& Development, 44(1). doi:10.1111/cch.12483 
Taheri, A., Perry, A., & Minnes, P. (2016). Examining the social participation of children and 
adolescents with Intellectual Disabilities and Autism Spectrum Disorder in relation to 
peers. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 60(5), 435-443. 
doi:10.1111/jir.12289 
van Schalkwyk, G. I., Marin, C., Ortiz, M., Rolison, M., Qayyum, Z., McPartland, J. C., . . . 
Silverman, W. K. (2017). Social media use, friendship quality, and the moderating 
role of anxiety in adolescents with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism and 
Developmental Disorders. doi:10.1007/s10803-017-3201-6 
World Health Organization. (2007). International Classification of Functioning, Disability 
and Health: Children and Youth version (ICF-CY). Geneva, Switzerland: World 
Health Organization.  
 
 

Table 1 
Child and Caregiver Characteristics at Y1 
Demographic variables  N = 84N (%) 
Child gender    
Male  66 (78.6) 
Other Medical condition/disability (based on carer report)  48 (57.1) 
English language spoken at home  84 (100) 
Caregiver’s relationship to the child   
Mother   71 (84.5) 
Father  11 (13.1) 
Missing  1 (1.2) 
Caregiver’s age    
31 – 40 years  37 (44.0) 
41 – 50 years  44 (52.4) 
>51 years  3 (3.6) 
Caregiver’s highest level of education   
No formal/Primary school  1 (1.2) 
Secondary school  22 (26.2) 
Tertiary education  60 (71.4) 
Missing  1 (1.2) 
Annual family income   
<$18,200  2 (2.4) 
$18,201–$37,000  5 (6.0) 
$37,001–$80,000  18 (21.4) 
$80,001–$180,000  42 (50.0) 
>$180,000  7 (8.3) 
Do not wish to respond  10 (11.9) 
 

$18,201–$

$37,001–$

$80,001–$

 
 
Figure 1. Home participation for Year (1,2,3). Frequency scale 0-7, Involvement scale 1-5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Figure 2. School participation for Year (1,2,3). Frequency scale 0-7, Involvement scale 1-5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Figure 3. Community participation for Year (1,2,3). Frequency scale 0-7, Involvement scale 
1-5  
 