Itoˆ calculus without probability in
idealized financial markets
4102 guA 92  ]RT.nif-q[  2v9970.8011:viXra
Vladimir Vovk
The Game-Theoretic Probability and Finance Project
Working Paper #36
First posted August 3, 2011. Last revised October 25, 2018.
Project web site:
http://www.probabilityandfinance.com

Abstract
We consider idealized financial markets in which price paths of the traded securi-
ties are c`adl`ag functions, imposing mild restrictions on the allowed size of jumps.
We prove the existence of quadratic variation for typical price paths, where the
qualification “typical” means that there is a trading strategy that risks only one
monetary unit and brings infinite capital if quadratic variation does not exist.
This result allows one to apply numerous known results in pathwise Itˆo calculus
to typical price paths; we give a brief overview of such results.
Contents
1 Introduction 1
2 Pathwise quadratic variation 2
3 Typical price paths 4
4 Existence of quadratic variation 8
5 Multidimensional case 16
6 F¨ollmer’s and Norvai˘sa’s quadratic variation 19
7 Implications of the existence of quadratic variation 23
8 Conclusion 25
References 26

1 Introduction
Itˆo calculus, based on the notion of the stochastic integral, plays an important
role in mathematical finance. However, the usual construction of the stochastic
integral relies on statistical assumptions about security prices, and it is not easy
to come up with their realistic statistical models, as witnessed by the prolif-
eration of various competing models in recent years. The pathwise stochastic
integral and Itˆo calculus proposed in 1981 by F¨ollmer [6] and developed by nu-
merous authors (see, e.g., [14, 3]) do not depend on any statistical assumptions.
They, however, depend on the existence of quadratic variation for the allowed
paths, which is postulated. The goal of this paper is to establish the existence of
quadratic variation of security prices under weak conditions that can be justified
from the economic point of view.
The existence of quadratic variation for typical continuous price paths was
established in [21], where it served as a tool for studying properties of typical
price paths, such as their volatility. This paper proves the existence of quadratic
variation under a weaker assumption than in [21]: the price paths are assumed
to be c`adl`ag without huge jumps. A related result was obtained in [22]: that
paper shows that the p-variation of typical prices paths is finite for p > 2. The
assumptions of [22] are not comparable to the assumptions of this paper: on
one hand, there are no restrictions on the size of jumps in [22], but on the other
hand, the price paths are assumed nonnegative (albeit strong, this assumption
is natural in the context of financial markets). In this paper, we will often be
using results and methods of [22].
This paper, like [21] and [22], is written in the tradition of game-theoretic
probability (see, e.g., [17, 19, 11, 12, 13]). In game-theoretic probability,
probability-like notions (such as the upper probabilities of events and upper
prices of functions) are defined in terms of idealized financial markets, and
mathematical finance is a natural field of application. The key technical tool
used in this paper will be “high-frequency limit order strategies”, introduced in
game-theoretic probability by [19].
We start the main part of the paper by defining in Section 2 the notion of
quadratic variation, a version of F¨ollmer’s pathwise definition adapted to our
goals. The next section, Section 3, states and discusses our assumption about
the jumps of price paths and defines the notion of a typical price path. Our main
result, the existence of quadratic variation for typical price paths, is established
in Section 4. Section 5 extends this result to typical vector-valued price paths;
in particular, it proves the existence of quadratic covariation between two price
paths. Section 6 compares the notion of quadratic variation used in this paper
with Norvai˘sa’s [14] and F¨ollmer’s [6]; we show that under natural conditions
(satisfied in the main example in this paper) the first two notions of quadratic
variation are equivalent, whereas F¨ollmer’s notion becomes equivalent to them
when another natural condition is added. Section 7 summarizes some of the
known results for price paths possessing quadratic variation.
1

Notation
The set of all real (resp. rational, resp. integer) numbers is denoted R (resp.
Q, resp. Z). The set of all natural numbers is denoted N: N := {1,2,...}; set
N := N∪{0}. We use the usual notation u∨v := max(u,v), u∧v := min(u,v),
0
and u+ := u∨0. If s < t, we will use the notation s∨u∧t to mean (s∨u)∧t =
s ∨ (u ∧ t). The expression inf ∅ is always interpreted as ∞.
The set of all c`adl`ag (i.e., continuous on the right and having limits on the
left) functions ω : [0,T] → R, where T > 0, will be denoted D[0,T]. If ω ∈
D[0,T] and t ∈ (0,T], we set ω(t−) := lim ω(s) and ∆ω(t) := ω(t) − ω(t−).
s↑t
As usual, Cn(R) stands for the set of all functions f : R → R that are n times
continuously differentiable.
2 Pathwise quadratic variation
Let ω : [0,T] → R be a c`adl`ag function, interpreted as the price path of a
financial security over the time period [0,T] whose end-point T > 0 is fixed
throughout the paper. In this section we give a modification of F¨ollmer’s [6]
definition of the quadratic variation of ω; F¨ollmer’s definition itself will be dis-
cussed in Section 6.
A partition (of [0,T]) is a finite sequence of numbers 0 = t < t < ··· <
0 1
t ≤ T; we also set t := ∞ for k > m. The mesh of this partition is
m k
max |(t ∧ T) − (t ∧ T)|.
k∈N k k−1
Let π = (π0,π1,π2,...) be a nested sequence of partitions: for each n ∈ N,
each element of πn−1 is an element of πn (in this paper we concentrate on
nested sequences of partitions). The nth approximation, n = 0,1,2,..., to the
quadratic variation of ω along π is defined by
∞
An,π := (cid:88)(cid:0) ω(πn ∧ t) − ω(πn ∧ t)(cid:1)2 , t ∈ [0,T], (2.1)
t k k−1
k=1
where, for each n ∈ N , πn, k = 0,1,..., are the elements of πn: πn =
0 k
(πn,πn,πn,...) and there is m = m(n) ∈ N such that 0 = πn < πn < ··· <
0 1 2 0 0 1
πn ≤ T and πn = ∞ for all k > m. By An,π we will mean the function
m k
n,π
t ∈ [0,T] (cid:55)→ A in D[0,T].
t
In this paper we will be interested in the uniform metric on D[0,T]:
ρ(ω,ω(cid:48)) := sup |ω(t) − ω(cid:48)(t)|.
t∈[0,T]
(This is an unusual metric for D[0,T], but standard for the set C[0,T] of con-
tinuous functions on [0,T].) Notice that D[0,T] is complete in the metric ρ;
this will be used in the proof of Theorem 1 below.
We say that ω has quadratic variation along π, where π is a nested sequence
of partitions, if the sequence An,π converges in the uniform metric ρ. The limit,
when it exists, is denoted Aπ and called the quadratic variation of ω along π.
2

A sequence π of partitions is dense if lim mesh(πn) = 0, where mesh(πn)
n→∞
is the mesh of πn. Quadratic variation along a sequence of partitions is usually
(see, e.g., [6, 14]) defined only for dense sequences of partitions. The sequences
of partitions considered in this paper are not always dense, and instead we will
use the following property. For ω ∈ D[0,T], we say that a nested sequence π of
partitions πn, n = 0,1,2,..., exhausts ω if:
• each t ∈ (0,T] such that ∆ω(t) (cid:54)= 0 belongs to πn for some n (equivalently,
from some n on);
• each open interval (u,v) in which ω is not constant contains at least one
element of πn for some n (equivalently, from some n on).
For ω ∈ D[0,T] and an interval I ⊆ [0,T] set w I := sup |ω(s ) −
ω s ,s ∈I 2
1 2
ω(s )|. The oscillation of ω ∈ D[0,T] over a partition πn is defined as
1
(cid:2) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
osc (ω) := maxw πn ∧ T,πn ∧ T = maxw πn ∧ T,πn ∧ T .
πn ω k−1 k ω k−1 k
k∈N k∈N
Lemma 1. If a nested sequence of partitions π exhausts ω ∈ D[0,T],
lim osc (ω) = 0. (2.2)
πn
n→∞
Proof. Let (cid:15) > 0. There exist points 0 = t < t < ··· < t = T such that
0 1 r
w [t ,t ) < (cid:15) for all i ∈ {1,...,r} ([1], Lemma 14.1). Let n be so large that
ω i−1 i
πn contains all t , i ∈ {1,...,r}, with ∆ω(t ) (cid:54)= 0 and contains a point in each
i i
interval (t ,t ), i ∈ {1,...,r}, such that ω is not constant in (t ,t ). For
i−1 i i−1 i
any k ∈ N , the interval (πn ∧ T,πn ∧ T) does not contain any points t with
0 k k+1 i
∆ω(t ) (cid:54)= 0 and does not contain any intervals (t ,t ), i ∈ {1,...,r}, where ω
i i−1 i
is not constant. Therefore, w (πn∧T,πn ∧T) < 2(cid:15). Since (cid:15) can be arbitrarily
ω k k+1
small, this completes the proof of (2.2).
Lemma 2. Suppose ω ∈ D[0,T] and π is a nested sequence of partitions that
exhausts ω. If the quadratic variation Aπ of ω along π exists, it is a nonde-
creasing c`adl`ag function satisfying Aπ = 0 with jumps ∆Aπ = (∆ω(t))2 for all
0 t
t ∈ (0,T].
Proof. The equality Aπ = 0 is obvious, and Aπ is c`adla`g as the uniform limit
0
of c`adla`g functions. (These statements do not rely on π exhausting ω, but the
other statements of the lemma do require a density condition for π: they fail,
for example, when π0 = π1 = ··· = (0,∞,∞,...).)
Let us now prove that Aπ is nondecreasing. If it is not, there exist t < t ≤
1 2
T and (cid:15) ∈ (0,1) such that Aπ > Aπ + 2(cid:15). For sufficiently large n, we will have
t t
1 2
n,π n,π
A > A + (cid:15). (2.3)
t t
1 2
Let n be so large that, in addition, osc (ω) < (cid:15) (cf. Lemma 1). Let t ∈
πn 1
[πn ,πn ) and t ∈ [πn ,πn ); notice that k(cid:48)(cid:48) ≥ k(cid:48). Since An,π ≥ An,π
k(cid:48)−1 k(cid:48) 2 k(cid:48)(cid:48) k(cid:48)(cid:48)+1 t πn
2 k(cid:48)(cid:48)
3

and An,π ≥ An,π for k = k(cid:48),...,k(cid:48)(cid:48) − 1, (2.3) implies An,π > An,π + (cid:15). This,
πn πn t πn
k+1 k 1 k(cid:48)
however, contradicts
An,π − An,π = (cid:0) ω(t ) − ω(πn )(cid:1)2 − (cid:0) ω(πn ) − ω(πn )(cid:1)2
t πn 1 k(cid:48)−1 k(cid:48) k(cid:48)−1
1 k(cid:48)
(cid:0) )(cid:1)2
≤ ω(t ) − ω(πn < (cid:15)2.
1 k(cid:48)−1
It remains to prove that ∆Aπ = (∆ω(t))2 for all t ∈ (0,T]. Fix t ∈ (0,T]
t
and (cid:15) > 0. Let n be so large that osc (ω) < (cid:15) (cf. Lemma 1). Define k ∈ N
πn 0
by the condition t ∈ (πn,πn ]. Since
k k+1
∆An,π ω(πn))2 ω(πn))2
= (ω(t) − − (ω(t−) −
t k k
= (∆ω(t))2 + 2∆ω(t)(ω(t−) − ω(πn)),
k
(cid:12) (cid:12)
we have (cid:12)∆An,π − (∆ω(t))2 (cid:12) ≤ 2(cid:15)|∆ω(t)|. As ∆An,π → ∆Aπ and (cid:15) can be
t t t
arbitrarily small, we obtain ∆Aπ = (∆ω(t))2.
t
3 Typical price paths
We consider a perfect-information game between two players called Reality (fi-
nancial market) and Sceptic (speculator). Reality outputs a c`adl`ag function
ω : [0,T] → R, interpreted as the price path of a financial security, and Scep-
tic tries to profit by trading in ω. First Sceptic presents his trading strategy
and then Reality chooses ω. In the first two subsections of this section we will
formalize this picture (often following [22]) by defining the allowed moves for
Reality and strategies for Sceptic.
Sample space
Let ψ : [0,∞) → (0,∞) be a nondecreasing function, fixed through most of this
paper. The set of allowed moves for Reality (our sample space) is
(cid:40) (cid:32) (cid:33)(cid:41)
(cid:12)
Ω := ω ∈ D[0,T] (cid:12) ∀t ∈ (0,T] : |∆ω(t)| ≤ ψ sup |ω(s)| . (3.1)
ψ
s∈[0,t)
The function ψ determines the allowed size of the jumps. It can be arbitrarily
large (but needs, however, to be known in advance). Our conclusions (e.g., in
Theorems 1 and 2) will not depend on ψ; therefore, our results become stronger
as ψ becomes larger.
Two natural examples of restrictions on the jumps are:
• The absolute values |∆ω(t)| of ω’s jumps never exceed a known constant
c > 0. Such price paths ω belong to Ω .
c
• The price path ω is known to be nonnegative, and the relative values
∆ω(t)/sup |ω(s)| (with 0/0 := 0) of ω’s jumps w.r. to their largest
s∈[0,t)
4

value so far never exceed a known constant c > 0. Such ω belong to Ω ,
ψ
where ψ(u) = (c ∨ 1)u. (There is no need to explicitly restrict downward
jumps when ω ≥ 0: they are restricted automatically by the current value
of the security.)
The first example is the simplest one mathematically and will be used in the
proof of our main result in Section 4. The second example is more relevant to
many real financial markets, and its generalized and elaborated version will be
discussed at the end of this section.
Trading strategies
For each t ∈ [0,T], F◦ is defined to be the smallest σ-algebra on Ω that makes
t ψ
all functions ω (cid:55)→ ω(s), s ∈ [0,t], measurable; F is defined as the universal
t
completion of F◦. A process (more fully, adapted process) S is a family of
t
functions S : Ω → [−∞,∞], t ∈ [0,T], each S being F -measurable. An event
t ψ t t
is an element of the σ-algebra F . Stopping times τ : Ω → [0,T] ∪ {∞} w.r.
T ψ
to the filtration (F ) and the corresponding σ-algebras F are defined as usual;
t τ
ω(τ(ω)) and S (ω) will often be simplified to ω(τ) and S (ω), respectively.
τ(ω) τ
The class of allowed strategies for Sceptic is defined in two steps. A simple
trading strategy G consists of: (a) a nondecreasing infinite sequence of stopping
times τ ≤ τ ≤ ··· such that, for each ω ∈ Ω , τ (ω) < ∞ for only finitely
1 2 ψ n
many n; (b) for each n = 1,2,..., a bounded F -measurable function h . To
τ n
n
such G and an initial capital α ∈ R corresponds the simple capital process
∞
G,α (cid:88) (cid:0) (cid:1)
K (ω) := α + h (ω) ω(τ ∧ t) − ω(τ ∧ t) , t ∈ [0,T]; (3.2)
t n n+1 n
n=1
G,α
the value h (ω) will be called the position taken at time τ , and K (ω) will
n n t
sometimes be referred to as Sceptic’s capital at time t. Notice that the sum of
finitely many simple capital processes is again a simple capital process.
A nonnegative capital process is any process S that can be represented in
the form
∞
(cid:88)
G ,α
S (ω) := K n n(ω), (3.3)
t t
n=1
G ,α
where the simple capital processes K n n(ω) are required to be nonnegative,
t
(cid:80)∞
for all t and ω, and the nonnegative series α is required to converge
n=1 n
in R (intuitively, the total capital invested has to be finite). The sum (3.3) is
G ,α
always nonnegative, but we allow it to take value +∞. Since K n n(ω) = α
0 n
does not depend on ω, S (ω) also does not depend on ω and will sometimes be
0
abbreviated to S .
0
Upper price
The upper price of a set E ⊆ Ω is defined as
ψ
(cid:8) (cid:12) (cid:9)
P(E) := inf S (cid:12) ∀ω ∈ Ω : S (ω) ≥ 1 (ω) , (3.4)
0 ψ T E
5

where S ranges over the nonnegative capital processes and 1 stands for the
E
indicator of E. Notice that P(Ω ) = 1 (in the terminology of [17], our game
ψ
protocol is “coherent”): indeed, P(Ω ) < 1 would mean that some nonnegative
ψ
capital process increases between time 0 and T for all ω ∈ Ω , and this is clearly
ψ
impossible for constant ω.
Remark 1. The notion of upper price (introduced in [20]) is similar to the
notion of upper hedging price (see, e.g., [7], Section 7.3) except that the latter
replaces the requirement ∀ω : S (ω) ≥ 1 (ω) in (3.4) by “S ≥ 1 a.s.”, thus
T E T E
requiring a statistical model for prices (which is, however, only used via its
family of events of probability zero).
Remark 2. An alternative probability-free definition of upper price is given in
[15], Definition 1, and [16], Definition 3.1. See [15], Section 2.1, for a comparison
of the two definitions; an advantage of our definition for the purpose of this paper
is that our mathematical results are at least as strong (and possibly stronger)
when they use our definition than when they use the definition of [15, 16] (see
[16], Lemma 10).
We say that E ⊆ Ω is null if P(E) = 0. A property of ω ∈ Ω will be said
ψ ψ
to hold for typical ω if the set of ω where it fails is null. Correspondingly, a set
E ⊆ Ω is almost certain if P(Ω \ E) = 0. All null sets E are automatically
ψ ψ
strictly null: there exists a nonnegative capital process S with S = 1 such that
0
S (ω) = ∞ for all ω ∈ E (indeed, if E is null, we can sum nonnegative capital
T
processes Sn, n ∈ N, such that Sn = 2−n and Sn ≥ 1 ). Notice that the union
0 T E
of countably (in particular, finitely) many null sets is also a null set.
Our definitions in view of margin requirements
In the rest of this section we discuss our definitions in view of the margin
requirements that traders usually have to comply with. Suppose, for concrete-
ness, that ω is the price path of a common stock. We then have ω(t) ≥ 0 for all
t ∈ [0,T]. Our definition (3.2) implicitly assumes the following picture. Sceptic
starts from the amount α in his margin account, and he never adds funds to
or withdraws funds from the account. He is allowed to take both positive and
negative positions in the stock (can go both long and short), but the capital in
his account should always stay nonnegative. Let us consider a somewhat more
realistic picture where Sceptic is required not only to keep the capital in the
margin account nonnegative but also to satisfy margin requirements.
In general, different margin requirements apply to long and short positions.
The rules can be summarized as follows. In the case of a long position, the
capital in the margin account should not only be nonnegative but should stay
nonnegative in the imaginary event that the stock price immediately drops by
100c %, where c is the minimum margin requirement for long positions. In
lg lg
the case of a short position, the capital in the margin account should not only
be nonnegative but should stay nonnegative in the imaginary event that the
stock price immediately rises by 100c %, where c is the minimum margin
sh sh
6

requirement for short positions. Different values may be used for c and c
lg sh
at the time when the position is opened and at later times; they are called the
initial and maintenance margin requirements, respectively. The current initial
margin requirements stipulated by the Federal Reserve Board [5] are the same
for both long and short positions: c = c = 0.5. The maintenance margin
lg sh
requirement never exceeds the initial margin requirement, and we make Sceptic’s
task harder by setting the former to the latter. As ω ≥ 0, we always assume
c ≤ 1.
lg
If the margin requirement becomes violated, the trader receives a request,
known as a margin call, to add funds to the account. If the margin call is
ignored, the account can be liquidated. We will assume that the margin account
provides “non-recourse” loans on the part of the broker, so that the trader is
not responsible for any possible shortfall after liquidation.
Remark 3. Although being non-recourse is a common feature of some related
kinds of loan, such as stock loans, margin loans themselves are legally recourse
loans in the USA. However, the assumption that margin loans are non-recourse
is not unusual ([8], p. 29) and there is a view that “margin loans, while legally
recourse loans, might be in a limbo, somewhere between recourse and nonre-
course” ([8], p. 38).
The trading strategy developed in this paper (see Theorem 1) starts with one
monetary unit, makes sure that the capital is always nonnegative, and brings
infinite capital if the quadratic variation of ω does not exist; it, however, assumes
that ω ∈ Ω . (What it means for the quadratic variation of ω ∈ Ω to exist will
ψ ψ
be defined in the next section and is not important for the current discussion.)
The strategy, however, has two disadvantages:
• whereas ensuring that its capital is always nonnegative when ω ∈ Ω , it
ψ
is not guaranteed to satisfy the margin requirements;
• the strategy can lead to a negative capital when ω ∈/ Ω .
ψ
If we, however, apply our result to the sample space Ω in place of Ω , where
ψ(cid:48) ψ
(cid:0) (cid:1)
ψ(cid:48)(u) := 1 ∨ (1 + c )ψ(u) + c u , (3.5)
sh sh
we will obtain a trading strategy satisfying the following stronger guarantees: it
still starts with one monetary unit; it makes sure that the margin requirements
are satisfied if ω ∈ Ω ; it brings infinite capital if ω ∈ Ω but the quadratic
ψ ψ
variation of ω does not exist; it never loses more than the one monetary unit
(because the strategy always ignores margin calls).
Let us check that the trading strategy constructed for Ω will indeed satisfy
ψ(cid:48)
the margin requirements for each of the constituent accounts (corresponding to
the addends in (3.3)), supposing ω ∈ Ω . Since ψ(cid:48) ≥ 1, at each time when
ψ
the position is long the capital in the account will be no less than the value
of the stock in the account at this time (otherwise, a 100% downward jump in
the price of ω would have led to a negative capital). Since c ≤ 1, the margin
lg
7

requirement will be satisfied. It remains to consider a time t when the position
is short. The worst case is when the price jumps up by the largest allowed
amount becoming ω(t) + ψ(sup ω(s)). The margin requirements will be
s∈[0,t)
satisfied if the capital resulting from the imaginary event that the price again
jumps up by a factor of 1 + c is still nonnegative. This is guaranteed by our
sh
strategy since, by (3.5),
(cid:32) (cid:32) (cid:33)(cid:33) (cid:32) (cid:33)
(1 + c ) ω(t) + ψ sup ω(s) ≤ ω(t) + ψ(cid:48) sup ω(s) .
sh
s∈[0,t) s∈[0,t)
4 Existence of quadratic variation
In this section we define a suitable sequence of partitions τn(ω) for each ω ∈
Ω and show that the quadratic variation of ω along this sequence exists for
ψ
typical ω.
For each n ∈ N , let Dn := {k2−n | k ∈ Z} and define a sequence of stopping
0
times τn, k = 0,1,2,..., and a sequence Dn, k = 0,1,2,..., of F -measurable
τn
k k
k
functions inductively by τn := 0, Dn := sup(Dn ∩ (−∞,ω(0)]),
0 0
(cid:8) (cid:9)
τn(ω) := inf t ∈ [τn (ω),T] | ω(τn ),ω(t) ∩ (Dn \ {Dn (ω)}) (cid:54)= ∅ ,
k k−1 k−1 k−1
(cid:74) (cid:75)
Dn(ω) ∈ argmin |D − ω(τn)| (4.1)
k D∈ ω(τn ),ω(τn) ∩(Dn\{Dn (ω)}) k
k−1 k k−1
(cid:74) (cid:75)
for k = 1,2,..., where we use the notation
(cid:40)
[u,v] if u ≤ v
u,v :=
[v,u] if u > v
(cid:74) (cid:75)
for the convex closure of the set {u,v}. Notice that the argmin in (4.1) is a
one-element set, and so Dn(ω) is determined uniquely.
k
We will check that τn are indeed stopping times and that Dn are F -
τn
k k
k
measurable in Lemma 3 below. If τn(ω) = ∞ (arising from our convention
k
inf ∅ := ∞), we set, e.g., Dn(ω) := 0. The intuition behind Dn is that it is the
k k
current element of Dn at time τn; when ω is continuous, Dn = ω(τn) (this is
k k k
the case considered in [21]), but in general we only have |Dn − ω(τn)| < 2−n,
k k
assuming τn < ∞. Let τn(ω) be the partition 0 = τn(ω) ≤ τn(ω) ≤ τn(ω) ≤ ···
k 0 1 2
(in fact, we will have τn(ω) < τn (ω) unless τn(ω) = ∞), and let τ(ω) be the
k k+1 k
sequence of the partitions τn(ω).
Theorem 1. Let ψ : [0,∞) → (0,∞) be a nondecreasing function. Typical
ω ∈ Ω have quadratic variation along τ(ω).
ψ
The theorem says that for typical ω ∈ Ω the sequence of functions
ψ
∞
(cid:88)(cid:0) t)(cid:1)2
An(ω) := ω(τn ∧ t) − ω(τn ∧ , n = 0,1,2,..., (4.2)
t k k−1
k=1
8

converges in the uniform metric to a function A(ω) ∈ D[0,T]. (In this section,
we omit mentioning the sequence of partitions in our notation for quadratic
variation.) Since the sequence of partitions τn(ω) is always nested and exhausts
ω (see Lemma 3 below), by Lemma 2, the limit A(ω) will be a nondecreasing
function satisfying A (ω) = 0 and ∆A (ω) = (∆ω(t))2 for all t ∈ (0,T].
0 t
The following lemma lists several useful properties of τn and Dn.
k k
Lemma 3. The functions τn : Ω → [0,∞] and Dn : Ω → R satisfy the
k ψ k ψ
following properties:
(a) the infimum in the definition of τn(ω) is attained, provided τn(ω) < ∞;
k k
(b) τn > τn unless τn = ∞;
k k−1 k−1
(c) for each n, τn < ∞ for only finitely many k;
k
(d) the sequences τn are nested: for all n,k ∈ N there is k(cid:48) such that τn+1 =
0 k(cid:48)
τn;
k
(e) for each ω ∈ Ω , the sequence of partitions τn(ω) exhausts ω;
ψ
(f) τn are bona fide stopping times and Dn are F -measurable.
τn
k k
k
Proof. Parts (a) and (b) follow from the right-continuity of ω.
Part (c) follows from the observation that the total number of upcrossings
and downcrossings of the intervals of the form (i2−n,(i + 1)2−n), i ∈ Z, by
ω over the time interval [0,τn] is at least k − 1; remember that functions in
k
D[0,T] are bounded and can cross any non-empty interval only finitely often
([4], Theorem 4.22).
Part (d) can be easily proved by induction in k if it is strengthened as
follows: for each n ∈ N there is a (unique) sequence 0 = i ≤ i ≤ ··· such
0 0 1
(cid:12) (cid:12)
that τn+1 = τn and (cid:12)Dn+1 − Dn (cid:12) ≤ 2−n−1.
i k i k
k k
Part (e) is obvious.
It remains to prove part (f). Fix n ∈ N ; we will use induction in k (τn = 0
0 0
is obviously a stopping time). Fix k ∈ N and suppose that τn is a stopping
k−1
time and Dn is F -measurable. Let t ∈ (0,T]. The condition τn(ω) ≤ t on
τn
k−1 k
k−1
ω can be rewritten as:
∃u ∈ (0,t) ∩ Q ∃D ∈ Dn : τn ≤ u & Dn = D & (4.3)
k−1 k−1
∃s ∈ (u,t] : ω(u),ω(s) ∩ (Dn \ {D}) (cid:54)= ∅ (4.4)
(cid:74) (cid:75)
(this uses the right-continuity of ω). To complete the proof that τn is a stopping
k
time, it suffices to prove that for any rational number u ∈ (0,t) and any D ∈ Dn,
the event (4.4) belongs to F .
t
It is clear that (4.4) can be represented as the union of events of the form
{∃s ∈ (u,t] : ω(u) ≤ D(cid:48) & ω(s) ≥ D(cid:48)(cid:48)}
= {ω(u) ≤ D(cid:48)} ∩ {∃s ∈ (u,t] : ω(s) ≥ D(cid:48)(cid:48)}
9

(perhaps with “≤” and “≥” interchanged) for some D(cid:48),D(cid:48)(cid:48) ∈ Dn. Therefore, it
suffices to prove that the event
∃s ∈ (u,t] : ω(s) ≥ D(cid:48)(cid:48) (4.5)
is in F (the case with “≤” in place of “≥” is treated analogously).
t
The event (4.5) is the projection onto Ω of the set A := {(s,ω) ∈ (u,t] ×
ψ
Ω | ω(s) ≥ D(cid:48)(cid:48)}. Since c`adl`ag processes are progressively measurable, A ∈
ψ
B ×F◦, where B is the Borel σ-algebra on [0,t] and B ×F◦ is the product σ-
t t t t t
algebra. This implies that the projection (4.5) is an F◦-analytic set (according
t
to [4], Theorem III.13(3)), which in turn implies that this set is in the universal
completion F of F◦ (according to [4], Theorem III.33).
t t
We can see that τn is a stopping time. By induction in k, each Dn is τn-
k k k
measurable: indeed, for D ∈ Dn, Dn = D is equivalent to ω(τn) ∈ [D,D+2−n)
k k
when D > Dn , is equivalent to ω(τn) ∈ (D − 2−n,D] when D < Dn , and
k−1 k k−1
is impossible when D = Dn .
k−1
Auxiliary results
The rest of this section is devoted to the proof of Theorem 1. First we notice
that it suffices to prove Theorem 1 only in the case where ψ is constant, ψ = c
for c > 0. Indeed, suppose Theorem 1 holds for all ψ = c and let us prove it for
general nondecreasing ψ. Since functions in D[0,T] are bounded and unions of
countably many null sets are null, it suffices to prove, for a fixed L ∈ N, that
typical ω ∈ Ω satisfying sup |ω(t)| ≤ 2L have quadratic variation along
ψ t∈[0,T]
τ(ω). The latter can be achieved by: (a) running a trading strategy risking at
most one monetary unit and bringing infinite capital when ω ∈ Ω for c := ψ(2L)
c
and ω does not have quadratic variation along τ(ω), and (b) stopping trading
at the time
(cid:8) (cid:9)
σ (ω) := inf t ∈ [0,T] | |ω(t)| ≥ 2L (4.6)
L
(this is a stopping time: see the proof of Lemma 3(f)).
Next we prove several auxiliary lemmas, assuming ψ = c for c ≥ 1 (there is
no loss of generality in the further assumption c ≥ 1).
Lemma 4. For each n ∈ N, the process Sn := An − An−1 is a simple capital
t t t
process.
Proof. We will show that Sn is the capital process of a simple trading strategy
t
that changes its position only at times τn. We have, for t ∈ [τn,τn ] ∩ [0,T]:
k k k+1
(cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Sn − Sn = An − An−1 − An − An−1
t τn t t τn τn
k k k
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
= An − An − An−1 − An−1
t τn t τn
k k
(cid:16) (cid:17)2 (cid:16) (cid:17)
= ω(t) − ω(τn) − (ω(t) − ω(τ))2 − (ω(τn) − ω(τ))2
k k
= −2(ω(τn) − ω(τ))(ω(t) − ω(τn)), (4.7)
k k
10

where τ := max{τn−1 | τn−1 ≤ τn}. Therefore, it suffices to take position
k(cid:48) k(cid:48) k
−2(ω(τn) − ω(τ)) at time τn.
k k
The proof of Theorem 1 involves the following simple capital process (based
on a standard idea going back to at least Kolmogorov [9]):
∞
(cid:88)(cid:16) (cid:17)2
Un := 2−2n+8c2 + n42−2n + (Sn)2 − Sn − Sn . (4.8)
t t τn∧t τn ∧t
k k−1
k=1
Lemma 5. For each n ∈ N, Un is indeed a simple capital process.
t
Proof. As in the previous lemma, the position is only changed at times τn.
k
When t ∈ [τn,τn ] ∩ [0,T], we have:
k k+1
(cid:32) (cid:33)
k
(cid:88)(cid:16) (cid:17)2 (cid:16) (cid:17)2
Un − Un = (Sn)2 − Sn − Sn − Sn − Sn
t τn t τn τn t τn
k i i−1 k
i=1
(cid:32) (cid:33)
k
(cid:16) (cid:17)2 (cid:88)(cid:16) (cid:17)2
− Sn − Sn − Sn
τn τn τn
k i i−1
i=1
(cid:16) (cid:17)
= 2Sn Sn − Sn
τn t τn
k k
= −4Sn (ω(τn) − ω(τ))(ω(t) − ω(τn))
τn k k
k
(the last equality follows from (4.7)). Therefore, it suffices to take position
−4Sn (ω(τn) − ω(τ)) at time τn.
τn k k
k
Set
(cid:40) (cid:41)
(cid:12) K
(cid:88)(cid:16) (cid:17)2
(cid:12)
σn := min τn (cid:12) Sn − Sn > n42−2n . (4.9)
K τn τn
(cid:12) k k−1
k=1
We will be interested in the nonnegative simple capital process Un ; its
σn∧t
nonnegativity (on Ω = Ω ) follows from (Sn − Sn )2 ≤ 2−2n+8c2, where
ψ c t τn
k
t ∈ [τn,τn ] ∩ [0,T], which in turn follows from (4.7):
k k+1
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)Sn − Sn (cid:12) = 2|ω(τn) − ω(τ)||ω(t) − ω(τn)|
(cid:12) t τn(cid:12) k k
k
(cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:0) (cid:1)
≤ 2 2 × 2−n+1 c + 2 × 2−n ≤ 2−n+4c.
To analyse the process Un we will need a probability-free version of Doob’s
σn∧t
upcrossing inequality (Lemma 6 below) and its corollary (Lemma 7) obtained
by a method proposed by Bruneau [2] and developed and simplified in [18] and
[22].
(a,b) (a,b)
Let M (f) (resp. D (f)) be the number of upcrossings (resp. down-
t t
crossings) of an open interval (a,b) by a function f : [0,T] → R during the time
interval [0,t]. For each h > 0 set
(cid:88) (cid:88)
(kh,(k+1)h) (kh,(k+1)h)
M (f,h) := M (f), D (f,h) := D (f).
t t t t
k∈Z k∈Z
Remember that σ is the stopping time defined by (4.6).
L
11

Lemma 6. Let L ∈ N and (a,b) ⊆ (−2L,2L) be a non-empty interval. There
exists a nonnegative simple capital process V that starts from V = a + 2L + c
0
and satisfies
(a,b)
V (ω) ≥ (b − a)M (ω) (4.10)
t t
for all ω ∈ Ω = Ω and all t ∈ [0,σ (ω)].
ψ c L
(Remember that V being nonnegative means that V (ω) ≥ 0 for all t and ω ∈
t
Ω .)
ψ
Proof. The following standard argument will be easy to formalize. A simple
trading strategy G leading to V can be defined as follows. The initial capital
is a + 2L + c. At first G takes position 0. When ω first hits (−∞,a], G takes
position 1 until ω hits [b,∞), at which point G takes position 0; after ω hits
(−∞,a], G maintains position 1 until ω hits [b,∞), at which point G takes
position 0; etc. The only exception is that trading is stopped at time σ : the
L
position at that time becomes 0 and stays 0 afterwards. (The essential bit is that
trading should be stopped when ω hits (−∞,−2L], if this ever happens.) Since
ω’s jumps never exceed c in absolute value, the process S will be nonnegative.
Formally, we define τ := inf{t ∈ [0,T] | ω(t) ∈ (−∞,a]} and, for n =
1
2,3,...,
τ := inf{t ∈ [0,T] | t > τ & ω(t) ∈ I },
n n−1 n
where I := [b,∞) for even n and I := (−∞,a] for odd n. Each τ is a
n n n
stopping time: this can be shown analogously to the proof of Lemma 3(f). We
have τ (ω) < ∞ for only finitely many n since ω is c`adl`ag: see, e.g., [4], Theorem
n
IV.22.
Since ω is a right-continuous function and (−∞,a] and [b,∞) are closed
sets, the infimum in the definition of τ , n = 1,2,..., is attained when τ < ∞.
n n
Therefore, ω(τ ) ≤ a, ω(τ ) ≥ b, ω(τ ) ≤ a, ω(τ ) ≥ b, and so on while τ < ∞.
1 2 3 4 n
Set, for n = 1,2,...,

τ if τ < σ
 n n L

τ(cid:48) := σ if τ < σ ≤ τ
n L n−1 L n

∞ otherwise
(the inequality τ < σ is considered to be true when n = 1). The position
n−1 L
taken by G at the time τ(cid:48), n = 1,2,..., is
n
(cid:40)
1 if τ(cid:48) < σ and n is odd
h := n L
n
0 otherwise,
and the initial capital is a + 2L + c. Let t ∈ [0,σ ] and n be the largest integer
L
such that τ ≤ t (with n := 0 when τ > t; the formulas below will never involve
n 1
τ ). Now we obtain from (3.2): if n is even,
0
V (ω) = V + (ω(τ ) − ω(τ )) + (ω(τ ) − ω(τ )) + ··· + (ω(τ ) − ω(τ ))
t 0 2 1 4 3 n n−1
12

≥ a + 2L + c + (b − a)M(a,b) (ω),
t
and if n is odd,
V (ω) = V + (ω(τ ) − ω(τ )) + (ω(τ ) − ω(τ )) + ··· + (ω(τ ) − ω(τ ))
t 0 2 1 4 3 n−1 n−2
+ (ω(t) − ω(τ ))
n
≥ a + 2L + c + (b − a)M(a,b) (ω) + (ω(t) − ω(τ ))
t n
≥ a + 2L + c + (b − a)M(a,b) (ω) + (−2L − c − a) = (b − a)M(a,b) (ω);
t t
in both cases, (4.10) holds. In particular, V (ω) is nonnegative.
t
Lemma 7. Let L ∈ N. For each n ∈ N, there exists a nonnegative simple
capital process V such that V ≤ 2L +c and V (ω) ≥ 2−2n−L−1 M (ω,2−n) for
0 t t−
all ω ∈ Ω and all t ∈ [0,σ (ω)].
c L
Proof. By Lemma 6, for each k ∈ {−2L+n,...,2L+n−1} there exists a nonneg-
ative simple capital process V k that starts from k2−n + 2L + c and satisfies
M(k2−n,(k+1)2−n)
V k(ω) ≥ 2−n (ω)
t t
for all t ∈ [0,σ (ω)]. Summing 2−L−n−1V k over k = −2L+n,...,2L+n −1 (i.e.,
L
averaging V k), we obtain a nonnegative simple capital process V such that
2L+n−1
(cid:88)
V = 2−L−n−1 k2−n + 2L + c ≤ 2L + c,
0
k=−2L+n
V (ω) ≥ 2−2n−L−1 M (ω,2−n) for all t < σ ;
t t L
at t = σ (ω) we are only guaranteed to have V (ω) ≥ 2−2n−L−1 M (ω,2−n)
L t t−
because of the possibility ω(t) ∈/ [−2L,2L].
Corollary 1. Let L ∈ N. For typical ω ∈ Ω , from some n ∈ N on,
c
M (ω,2−n) ≤ n222n and D (ω,2−n) ≤ n222n.
σ − σ −
L L
Proof. It suffices to prove that M (ω,2−n) ≤ n1.522n from some n on (since
σ −
L
D (ω,2−n) ≤ M (ω,2−n)+2n+L). Consider the event E that the inequal-
σ − σ −
L L
ity M (ω,2−n) > n1.522n holds for infinitely many n. (This is the comple-
σ −
L
mentary event to the event that we are proving to be almost certain.) For each
n ∈ N let V n be a nonnegative simple capital process such that V n ≤ 2L + c
t 0
and V n ≥ 2−2n−L−1 M (ω,2−n) (see Lemma 7). Then, for infinitely many
σ σ L−
L
n, V n ≥ 2−L−1n1.5 on E. To see that the event E is null, it suffices to no-
σ
L (cid:80)
tice that the process n−1.5V n starts from V < ∞ and satisfies V = ∞
n 0 σ L
on E.
13

Proof of Theorem 1 (for ψ = c)
Let L ∈ N. For all ω ∈ Ω and for t := σ (ω), the infinite sum in (4.8) can be
c L
bounded above as follows (cf. (4.7)):
∞
(cid:88)(cid:16) (cid:17)2
Sn − Sn
τn ∧σ τn∧σ
k+1 L k L
k=0
∞
= 22 (cid:88) (ω(τn ∧ σ ) − ω(τ ∧ σ ))2 (cid:0) ω(τn ∧ σ ) − ω(τn ∧ σ )(cid:1)2
k L L k+1 L k L
k=0
∞
(cid:88)(cid:0) )(cid:1)2
≤ 26−2n ω(τn ∧ σ ) − ω(τn ∧ σ . (4.11)
k+1 L k L
k=0
Fix an ω ∈ Ω such that, from some n ∈ N on, M (ω,2−n) ≤ n222n
c σ −
L
and D (ω,2−n) ≤ n222n; by Corollary 1, this condition is satisfied for typ-
σ −
L
ical ω ∈ Ω . Let N ∈ {2,3,...} be so large that M (ω,2−n) ≤ n222n and
c σ −
L
D (ω,2−n) ≤ n222n for all n ≥ N. In particular, for all m ≥ N:
σ −
L
• the number of k ∈ N such that τm < ∞ does not exceed 2m222m + 2 ≤
0 k
3m222m;
• the number of jumps of ω of size 2−m+1 or more over the time interval
[0,σ (ω)) does not exceed 2m222m. (By the size of a jump of ω at t ∈
L
(0,T] we mean its absolute value |∆ω(t)|.)
We will write t ∈ τn to mean that t is an element of the partition τn: there
exists k ∈ N such that t = τn.
0 k
Suppose n ≥ N. We will bound different addends in (4.11) in different ways:
(A) If τn ≤ σ ≤ τn , we use the trivial bound
k L k+1
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)ω(τn ∧ σ ) − ω(τn ∧ σ )(cid:12) ≤ 21−n + c.
k+1 L k L
There are at most two such addends. We ignore the zero addends for
which τn > σ , and so assume τn < σ in the rest of this list.
k L k+1 L
(B) If τn ∈/ τn−1,
k+1
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)ω(τn ∧ σ ) − ω(τn ∧ σ )(cid:12) ≤ 22−n.
k+1 L k L
The number of such k is at most 3n222n.
(C) If τn ∈ τn−1 and the size of the jump of ω at τn is below 2−n+1,
k+1 k+1
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)ω(τn ∧ σ ) − ω(τn ∧ σ )(cid:12) ≤ 21−n + 2−n+1 = 22−n.
k+1 L k L
The number of such k is at most 3n222n.
14

(D) If τn ∈ τn−1 and the size of the jump of ω at τn belongs to
k+1 k+1
[2−m+1,2−m+2), where m ∈ {n,n − 1,...,N},
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)ω(τn ∧ σ ) − ω(τn ∧ σ )(cid:12) ≤ 21−n + 2−m+2.
k+1 L k L
The number of such k is at most 2m222m.
(E) If τn ∈ τn−1 and the size of the jump of ω at τn is 2−N+2 or more,
k+1 k+1
we will use the trivial bound
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)ω(τn ∧ σ ) − ω(τn ∧ σ )(cid:12) ≤ 21−n + c.
k+1 L k L
The number of such k is bounded by a constant C (it is a constant in the
sense of not depending on n, but it depends on ω and L).
Now we can bound the last sum in (4.11) as follows:
∞
(cid:88)(cid:0) )(cid:1)2 (cid:0) 22−n(cid:1)2
ω(τn ∧ σ ) − ω(τn ∧ σ ≤ 2(21−n + c)2 + 3n222n
k+1 L k L
k=0
n
(cid:0) (cid:1)2 (cid:88) (cid:0) (cid:1)2
+ 3n222n 22−n + 2m222m 21−n + 2−m+2 + C(21−n + c)2 ≤ 2−6n4,
m=N
the last inequality being true from some n on. Remembering the definitions
(4.8) and (4.9) of Un and σn, we can see that, from some n on, σn(ω) > σ (ω)
t L
and, therefore,
Un (ω) = Un(ω) ≥ (Sn(ω))2 (4.12)
σn∧t t t
for all t ≤ σ (ω).
L
We have shown that, for typical ω ∈ Ω , from some n on, (4.12) holds for all
c
t ≤ σ (ω). On the other hand, for typical ω ∈ Ω from some n on we will have
L c
∀t ∈ [0,σ (ω)] : Un (ω) < n62−2n. (4.13)
L σn∧t
Indeed, if V n is the process Un stopped when it reaches the value n62−2n,
t σ ∧σn∧t
L
the nonnegative capital process
∞
(cid:88)
V := n−622nV n
t t
n=1
will have a finite initial value and satisfy V (ω) = ∞ for ω such that, for
T
infinitely many n, ∃t ∈ [0,σ (ω)] : Un (ω) ≥ n62−2n. Combining (4.12) and
L σn∧t
(4.13), we obtain that, for typical ω ∈ Ω , from some n on, we have |Sn| < n32−n
c t
for all t ∈ [0,σ (ω)].
L
We can see that, for typical ω ∈ Ω , the uniform distance between An−1 and
c
An does not exceed n32−n from some n on provided σ = T. Therefore, for
L
typical ω ∈ Ω the sequence An is convergent in the uniform metric provided
c
σ = T. Since the union of countably many null sets is a null set, we can omit
L
“provided σ = T”.
L
15

5 Multidimensional case
The goal of this section is to establish the existence of quadratic covariation be-
tween different price paths. We will be using a standard expression of quadratic
covariation in terms of quadratic variation (the “polarization identity”, used in
[6], Remark 1 on p. 147).
Let ωm ∈ Ω , m = 1,...,M. In our informal discussions we will assume
ψ
that ωm, m = 1,...,M, are the price paths of all securities traded in a financial
market. We will write ω for the function whose value ω(t) at time t ∈ [0,T]
is the vector (ω1(t),...,ωM(t)) ∈ RM; the set of all such functions ω with
components ωm ∈ Ω will be denoted ΩM.
ψ ψ
In this section we set Ω := ΩM (little, however, will depend on this specific
ψ
definition of Ω, and the definitions and statements below work for a wide class
of Ω). The σ-algebra F◦, t ∈ [0,T], is the smallest σ-algebra on Ω that makes
t
all functions ω ∈ Ω (cid:55)→ ωm(s), where m ∈ {1,...,M} and s ∈ [0,t], measurable.
The σ-algebras F , processes, stopping times τ, and σ-algebras F on Ω are
t τ
defined for the sample space Ω in the same way as for the sample space Ω :
ψ
replacing Ω by Ω is the only change. The other definitions of Section 3 carry
ψ
over to the case of Ω = ΩM, with the following changes. In the definition of
ψ
simple trading strategies, the bounded F -measurable functions h now take
τ n
n
values in RM, and the definition (3.2) of a simple capital process now becomes
∞
G,α (cid:88) (cid:0) (cid:1)
K (ω) := α + h (ω) · ω(τ ∧ t) − ω(τ ∧ t) , t ∈ [0,T],
t n n+1 n
n=1
where “·” stands for dot product in RM.
For all ω ∈ Ω and n ∈ N , let us define a sequence τn(ω), k = 0,1,2,..., as
0 k
the finite set
(cid:8) (cid:9)
τn(ωm) | k ∈ N , m ∈ {1,...,M}
k 0
(cid:8) (cid:9)
∪ τn(ωm + ωl) | k ∈ N , m ∈ {1,...,M}, l ∈ {1,...,M}
k 0
ordered in the increasing order (with repetitions removed, by the definition of
a set); to make the sequence τn(ω) infinite, we complement it by ∞,∞,... on
the right. It is clear that τn(ω) as functions of ω ∈ Ω are stopping times.
k
The sequence (τn(ω),τn(ω),...) will be denoted τn(ω); for a fixed ω, this
0 1
is a partition of [0,T]. By τ(ω) we denote the sequence of partitions τn(ω),
n ∈ N .
0
Theorem 2. For typical ω ∈ Ω = ΩM, each ωm, m ∈ {1,...,M}, has quadratic
ψ
variation along τ(ω), and each ωm + ωl, (m,l) ∈ {1,...,M}2, has quadratic
variation along τ(ω).
Before proving Theorem 2, let us see how to use it to define quadratic
covariation. We will use the notation [ωm] for the quadratic variation of
ωm, m ∈ {1,...,M}, and [ωm + ωl] for the quadratic variation of ωm + ωl,
16

(m,l) ∈ {1,...,M}2, along τ(ω). Now we define the quadratic covariation
processes between different price paths by
1
[ω]m,l := (cid:0) [ωm + ωl] − [ωm] − [ωl] (cid:1) , t ∈ [0,T], (m,l) ∈ {1,...,M}2;
t 2 t t t
(5.1)
they exist for typical ω ∈ Ω. Notice that [ω]m,m = [ωm] and that
[ω]m,l = (cid:0) [ω]m,l(cid:1)c + (cid:88) ∆ωm(s)∆ωl(s),
t t
s∈(0,t]
where fc stands for the continuous part of a function f.
Proof of Theorem 2
We have already proved that ωm have quadratic variation, but along a different
sequence of partitions, τ(ωm) rather than τ(ω). Now we stop and change our
positions as soon as any security in the market or the sum of two securities
significantly change their value, so we have one sequence of partitions for the
whole market. But the argument of Section 4 still works, as it depends on
relatively few properties of the sequence of partitions, which are still satisfied.
To see what properties of the array τn of stopping times were used in Sec-
k
tion 4, let ιn (n ∈ N , k ∈ N ) be a general array of stopping times on Ω of the
k 0 0
same kind as τn: ιn(ω), n ∈ N , are nested partitions of [0,T] for each ω ∈ Ω
k 0
and all ιn are stopping times; in particular, 0 = ιn ≤ ιn ≤ ··· and all ιn take
k 0 1 k
values in [0,T] ∪ {∞}. We say that the sequence ι of random (i.e., depending
on ω ∈ Ω) nested partitions ιn is of dyadic type for a process W (such as ωm or
ωm + ωl) if there exist a polynomial p and a constant C > 0 such that:
(a) For all ω ∈ Ω, all n ∈ N , and all 0 ≤ s < t ≤ T such that |W − W | >
0 t s
C2−n, there exists k such that ιn(ω) ∈ (s,t].
k
(b) For typical ω ∈ Ω, from some n on, the number of k such that ιn(ω) < ∞
k
is at most p(n)22n.
Intuitively, (a) says that the partitions are sufficiently fine, and (b) says that
they are not too fine. Condition (a) implies that ι(ω) should exhaust ω and can
be regarded as a quantitative version of this requirement.
A process W has moderate jumps if there exists a nondecreasing function
φ : [0,∞) → (0,∞) such that, for each ω ∈ Ω,
(cid:32) (cid:33)
∀t ∈ (0,T] : |∆W (ω)| ≤ φ sup |W (ω)|
t s
s∈[0,t)
(cf. (3.1)). We let W(ω), where W is a process and ω ∈ Ω, stand for the function
t ∈ [0,T] (cid:55)→ W (ω) ∈ R. The quadratic variation of W(ω) along ι(ω) is defined
t
17

as before (cf. (2.1) and (4.2)) with W(ω) in place of ω, namely, as the uniform
limit as n → ∞ of
∞
(cid:88)(cid:16) (cid:17)2
n,τ
A (ω) := W (ω) − W (ω) .
t ιn∧t ιn ∧t
k k−1
k=1
We saw in Section 4 that the sequence τ(ω) of partitions defined earlier in this
section is of dyadic type for all ω ∈ Ω (with C := 2 and p(n) := (M2 + M)3n2
sufficient). This shows, in combination with Proposition 2 below, that the
following proposition generalizes Theorem 1.
Proposition 1. If an array ιn of stopping times on Ω is of dyadic type for a
k
simple capital process W that has moderate jumps, W(ω) has quadratic variation
along ι(ω) for typical ω ∈ Ω.
Proof. It is easy to check that the proof of Theorem 1, with suitable changes,
still works in our current more general situation; now we consider paths W(ω)
instead of ω.
Condition (a) (with C = 2) was used in establishing the nonnegativity of
the simple capital process (4.8) over [0,σn ∧ T] and our upper bound on the
infinite sum (4.11) in (4.8). For our arguments to go through, the definition
of the simple capital process (4.8) should be modified: the addend 2−2n+8c2
should be replaced by a constant (depending only on c and C) times 2−2n,
and the polynomial n4 in the addend n42−2n should be replaced by a different
polynomial (depending on p). To upper bound (4.11), we have used (in the
cases (A)–(E) of Section 4) the inequality
(cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)ω(τn (ω)) − ω(τn(ω))(cid:12) ≤ 21−n + (cid:12)∆ω(τn )(cid:12)
k+1 k k+1
assuming τn (ω) < σ (ω). This inequality continues to hold with 21−n re-
k+1 L
placed by C2−n in our current situation: indeed, condition (a) implies that
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)ω(ιn (ω)−) − ω(ιn(ω))(cid:12) ≤ C2−n.
k+1 k
Condition (b) can be used in the cases (B)–(D) in Section 4 to bound the
number of k covered by each of those cases. We need the weaker requirement
that ιn < ∞ for only finitely many k also to satisfy a requirement in the defini-
k
tion of simple trading strategies.
Let m,l ∈ {1,...,M}. The processes ωm and ωm+ωl have moderate jumps
(with φ := ψ and φ := 2ψ, respectively). Both ωm and ωm + ωl are simple
capital processes. We can see that, for typical ω ∈ Ω, ωm and ωm + ωl have
quadratic variation along τ(ω).
The proof of Theorem 2 is now complete. However, there remains the ques-
tion of invariance of our definitions; e.g., is the quadratic variation Aτ(ω)(ωm) of
ωm along τ(ω) (our new definition) the same function as the quadratic variation
Aτ(ωm)(ωm) of ωm along τ(ωm) (our old definition)? The proof of Theorem 1
shows that they are. For simplicity, we will only spell out the argument in the
framework of Proposition 1.
18

Proposition 2. If arrays ιn and κn of stopping times on Ω are of dyadic type
k k
for a simple capital process W, W(ω) has the same quadratic variation along
ι(ω) and along κ(ω) for typical ω ∈ Ω.
Proof. Without loss of generality we can assume that ι is nested in κ: for all
ω ∈ Ω, n ∈ N , and k ∈ N , there exists k(cid:48) ∈ N such that κn (ω) = ιn(ω).
0 0 0 k(cid:48) k
(Indeed, this special case will imply that general ι and κ lead to the same
quadratic variation as their union.) The argument in the proof of Theorem 1
(applied to ι(ω) and κ(ω) in place of τn−1(ω) and τn(ω), so that Sn(ω) :=
t
n,κ n,ι
A (ω)−A (ω)) shows that, for typical ω ∈ Ω, the uniform distance between
t t
An,ι(ω) and An,κ(ω) converges to 0 (exponentially fast) as n → ∞. Therefore,
the uniform limits of An,ι(ω) and An,κ(ω) coincide.
6 Fo¨llmer’s and Norvai˘sa’s quadratic variation
In this section we adapt F¨ollmer’s [6] and Norvai˘sa’s [14] definitions of quadratic
variation to our framework (in particular, to our bounded time interval [0,T]).
Let ω ∈ D[0,T] and π be a nested sequence of partitions that exhausts ω.
We say that ω has F¨ollmer’s quadratic variation along π if the sequence of
finite measures
∞
(cid:88)(cid:0) T)(cid:1)2
ξn := ω(πn ∧ T) − ω(πn ∧ δ
k k−1 ω(πn ∧T)
k−1
k=1
(δ being the Dirac measure at t) on [0,T] weakly converges to a finite measure
t
ξ on [0,T] whose discrete part is given by the squared jumps of ω:
(cid:88)
V (t) = V c(t) + (∆ω(s))2, (6.1)
s∈(0,t]
where V is the distribution function of ξ and V c is its continuous part. We will
say that V is F¨ollmer’s quadratic variation of ω along π.
F¨ollmer’s [6] original definition of quadratic variation is different from the
definition above in the following respects: it does not require the sequence π of
partitions to be nested; it does not require π to exhaust ω; it requires π to be
dense; it assumes the unbounded time interval [0,∞). F¨ollmer uses the notation
[ω,ω] for the function V and does not use the term “quadratic variation” in
respect of V .
We say that ω has Norvai˘sa’s quadratic variation along π if there exists a
function V ∈ D[0,T] such that, for all 0 ≤ s < t ≤ T,
∞
(cid:88)(cid:0) t)(cid:1)2
V (t) − V (s) = lim ω(s ∨ πn ∧ t) − ω(s ∨ πn ∧ (6.2)
k k−1
n→∞
k=1
and, for any t ∈ (0,T],
∆V (t) = (∆ω(t))2. (6.3)
19

The function V is called Norvai˘sa’s quadratic variation of ω along π.
Norvai˘sa’s ([14], p. 1) original definition is different from the definition in the
previous paragraph in the following respects: it does not require π to exhaust
ω; it requires π to be dense; it only requires ω to be a regulated, rather than
c`adl`ag, function. Norvai˘sa calls V the bracket function of ω.
We can also weaken Norvai˘sa’s requirements to the function V . Namely, we
will say that ω has weak quadratic variation along π if there exists a function
V ∈ D[0,T] such that
∞
(cid:88)(cid:0) t)(cid:1)2
V (t) = lim ω(πn ∧ t) − ω(πn ∧ (6.4)
k k−1
n→∞
k=1
at all points t ∈ [0,T] of continuity of V and (6.3) holds for all t ∈ (0,T]. The
function V is then called the weak quadratic variation of ω along π.
The last two notions of quadratic variation are equivalent to the one defined
in Section 2:
Proposition 3. Let ω ∈ D[0,T] and π be a nested sequence of partitions that
exhausts ω. The following three conditions are equivalent:
(a) the quadratic variation of ω along π exists (in the sense of Section 2) and
is V = Aπ;
(b) Norvai˘sa’s quadratic variation of ω along π exists and is V ;
(c) the weak quadratic variation of ω along π exists and is V .
Proof. First we assume condition (a) and prove condition (b). We know that
(6.2) (with V := Aπ) holds for s = 0, so we assume s > 0. In this case, (6.2) is
equivalent to
(cid:16) (cid:17)2 (cid:16) (cid:17)2
ω(πn ) − ω(πn ) − ω(s) − ω(πn )
k(s,n) k(s,n) k(s,n)
(cid:16) (cid:17)2
− ω(πn ) − ω(s) → 0 (n → ∞), (6.5)
k(s,n)
where k(s,n) is the largest k satisfying πn ≤ s and k(s,n) is the smallest k
k
satisfying πn ≥ s ((6.5) assumes that ω is not constant over [s,t]; the simple
k
case where it is has to be considered separately). We can rewrite (6.5) as
(cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:16) (cid:17)
ω(πn ) − ω(s) ω(s) − ω(πn ) → 0,
k(s,n) k(s,n)
which immediately follows from Lemma 1: if s ∈ (k(s,n),k(s,n)) for all n (this
is the non-trivial case), the first factor stays bounded and the second tends to
0 as n → ∞. This proves (6.2), and (6.3) holds by Lemma 2.
It is obvious that (b) implies (c).
Finally, we assume condition (c) and prove (a). We know that An,π → V at
all points of continuity of V as n → ∞, and our goal is to prove that An,π → V
20

uniformly. By the compactness of [0,T], it suffices to prove that, for each point
t∗ ∈ [0,T], An,π → V uniformly in some neighbourhood of t∗. Fix such t∗. We
consider two cases separately:
• Suppose ∆V (t∗) = 0. Let (cid:15) ∈ (0,1). Choose t(cid:48) < t∗ and t(cid:48)(cid:48) > t∗ such
that ∆V (t(cid:48)) = 0, ∆V (t(cid:48)(cid:48)) = 0, and V (t) belongs to (V (t∗) − (cid:15),V (t∗) + (cid:15))
for all t ∈ [t(cid:48),t(cid:48)(cid:48)]. From some n on, An,π belongs to (V (t(cid:48)) − (cid:15),V (t(cid:48)) + (cid:15))
t(cid:48)
and An,π belongs to (V (t(cid:48)(cid:48)) − (cid:15),V (t(cid:48)(cid:48)) + (cid:15)). Therefore, from some n on,
t(cid:48)(cid:48)
both An,π and An,π belong to (V (t∗) − 2(cid:15),V (t∗) + 2(cid:15)). From the proof
t(cid:48) t(cid:48)(cid:48)
n,π
of Lemma 2 we know that, from some n on, A never drops by more
t
than (cid:15) as t increases (see (2.3), which we show to be impossible from some
n on when t < t ; the simple argument in that proof only depends on
1 2
conditions that are satisfied in our current context). Therefore, from some
n on, An,π belongs to (V (t∗) − 3(cid:15),V (t∗) + 3(cid:15)) for all t ∈ [t(cid:48),t(cid:48)(cid:48)]. We can
t
n,π
see that, from some n on, A belongs to (V (t) − 4(cid:15),V (t) + 4(cid:15)) for all
t
t ∈ [t(cid:48),t(cid:48)(cid:48)].
• Suppose that ∆V (t∗) (cid:54)= 0. Let (cid:15) ∈ (0,1). Choose t(cid:48) < t∗ and t(cid:48)(cid:48) > t∗ such
that ∆V (t(cid:48)) = 0, ∆V (t(cid:48)(cid:48)) = 0, V (t) belongs to the interval (V (t∗−) −
(cid:15),V (t∗−)+(cid:15)) for all t ∈ [t(cid:48),t∗), and V (t) belongs to (V (t∗)−(cid:15),V (t∗)+(cid:15))
for all t ∈ [t∗,t(cid:48)(cid:48)]. From some n on,
An,π ∈ (cid:0) V (t∗−) − 2(cid:15),V (t∗−) + 2(cid:15)(cid:1) , (6.6)
t(cid:48)
An,π ∈ (cid:0) V (t∗) − 2(cid:15),V (t∗) + 2(cid:15)(cid:1) . (6.7)
t(cid:48)(cid:48)
From some n on there is a k such that t∗ = πn and πn ∈ (t(cid:48),t∗) (unless
k k−1
ω is constant over (t(cid:48),t∗), in which case πn should be replaced by t(cid:48) in
k−1
the rest of this proof); and from some n on, osc (ω) < (cid:15) (Lemma 1).
πn
Since ∆V (t∗) = (∆ω(t∗))2, for such n we have
An,π − An,π = (cid:0) ω(t∗) − ω(πn )(cid:1)2 > ∆V (t∗) − 2∆ (cid:15), (6.8)
πn πn k−1 ω
k k−1
n,π
where ∆ := sup |∆ω(t)|. We know that, from some n on, A
ω t∈(0,T] t
never drops by more than (cid:15) as t increases. According to (6.6), (6.7), and
(6.8), we then have

An,π − An,π > ∆V (t∗) − 2∆ (cid:15)
  πn πn ω
 k k−1
An,π < V (t∗) + 3(cid:15)
πn
 k
 An,π > V (t∗−) − 3(cid:15).
πn
k−1
This system of three inequalities immediately implies
(cid:40)
An,π > V (t∗) − 2∆ (cid:15) − 3(cid:15)
πn ω
k
An,π < V (t∗−) + 2∆ (cid:15) + 3(cid:15).
πn ω
k−1
Combining this with (6.6), (6.7), and osc (ω) < (cid:15), we can see that
πn
(cid:40)
An,π ∈ (V (t∗) − 2∆ (cid:15) − 4(cid:15),V (t∗) + 3(cid:15)) if t ∈ [t∗,t(cid:48)(cid:48)]
t ω
An,π ∈ (V (t∗−) − 3(cid:15),V (t∗−) + 2∆ (cid:15) + 4(cid:15)) if t ∈ [t(cid:48),t∗).
t ω
21

Therefore, from some n on, we have
n,π
|A − V (t)| < 2∆ (cid:15) + 5(cid:15)
t ω
for all t ∈ [t(cid:48),t(cid:48)(cid:48)].
In both cases An,π converges to V uniformly in some neighbourhood of t∗, which
completes the proof.
On the other hand, F¨ollmer’s notion of quadratic variation is different and
even anomalous unless π is dense. Set, e.g.,

0 if t ∈ [0,T/2)


ω(t) := 1 if t ∈ [T/2,T)

0 if t = T
and consider the sequence of nested partitions
π1 = π2 = ··· := (0,T/2,T,∞,∞,...),
which exhausts ω. The three definitions whose equivalence is asserted in Propo-
sition 3 give the same quadratic variation V of ω along π,

0 if t ∈ [0,T/2)


V (t) := 1 if t ∈ [T/2,T)

2 if t = T,
whereas F¨ollmer’s does not exist: the first part of the definition gives
(cid:40)
1 if t ∈ [0,T/2)
V (t) :=
2 if t ∈ [T/2,T],
which fails to satisfy (6.1) at t = T (V (0) (cid:54)= 0 also looks anomalous). The
anomalies disappear when π is dense:
Proposition 4. Let ω ∈ D[0,T] and π be a dense nested sequence of partitions.
(a) If the quadratic variation V of ω along π exists in the sense of any of the
three definitions of Proposition 3, V is also F¨ollmer’s quadratic variation
of ω along π.
(b) If F¨ollmer’s quadratic variation V of ω along π exists, V is also the
quadratic variation of ω along π in the sense of the three definitions of
Proposition 4.
Proof. We start from (a). Let V be the quadratic variation of ω along π in
the sense of the definitions of Proposition 3. Since (6.1) is obviously equivalent
22

to (6.3), the definition of F¨ollmer’s quadratic variation shows that it suffices to
prove
(cid:88) (cid:0) )(cid:1)2
ω(πn ∧ T) − ω(πn → V (t) (6.9)
k k−1
k∈N:πn ≤t
k−1
as n → ∞, where t ∈ [0,T] is such that V is continuous at t, i.e., by (6.3), ω
is continuous at t. Comparing (6.9) with (6.4), we can see that, furthermore, it
suffices to prove
(cid:16) (cid:17)2 (cid:16) (cid:17)2
ω(t) − ω(πn ) − ω(πn ∧ T) − ω(πn ) → 0, (6.10)
k(t,n) k(t,n)+1 k(t,n)
which immediately follows from the continuity of ω at t provided π is dense.
The argument in the previous paragraph (cf. (6.10)) also establishes (b).
Remark 4. F¨ollmer’s [6] and Norvai˘sa’s [14] condition that the sequence of
partitions π should be dense would not in fact be a big obstacle in this paper:
to make the random sequence of partitions τn formed by the stopping times τn
k
(as defined in Section 4 or Section 5) dense we can simply complement τn(ω)
by the points Tk2−n, k = 1,...,2n −1. The properties (a)–(b) of Section 5 will
be still satisfied after this extension and the sequence will be still nested. This
step is, however, awkward, and we avoid it.
7 Implications of the existence of quadratic vari-
ation
This section reviews some known implications (the simpler ones from [6] and
[14]) of the existence of quadratic variation. Let ω ∈ D[0,T] and π = (πn) be a
nested sequence of partitions that exhausts ω. We are mainly interested in the
case where π = (πn(ω)) is the sequence of partitions formed by the stopping
times τn, as defined in Section 4. We know that in this case the quadratic
k
variation of ω exists unless ω is in a null set (Theorem 1). To simplify notation,
we do not consider the multidimensional case (Section 5 and Theorem 2).
Throughout this section, we fix ω ∈ D[0,T] and π = (πn) such that π is a
nested sequence of partitions that exhausts ω and the quadratic variation of ω
along π exists (cf. Proposition 3). As in Section 5, we use square brackets to
denote the quadratic variation along π, when it exists; e.g., [ω] is the quadratic
variation of ω along π. A minor difference of the results that we state in this
section from the original ones stated in [6] and [14] is that we do not assume
that π is dense: the assumption of denseness becomes redundant under our
assumptions since we can always remove all intervals of constancy from the
domain of ω.
23

Stochastic integration and Itoˆ’s lemma
Suppose f : R → R. For each t ∈ [0,T] and ω ∈ D[0,T], define
(cid:90) t ∞
(cid:88) (cid:0) (cid:1)
f(ω(s−))dω(s) := lim f(ω(πn(ω) ∧ t)) ω(πn ∧ t) − ω(πn ∧ t) .
k k+1 k
n→∞
0
k=0
(7.1)
The following two propositions are F¨ollmer’s ([6], p. 144) theorem adapted to
our framework. The first proposition says that the stochastic integral (7.1)
exists.
Proposition 5. Let f ∈ C1(R). The limit in (7.1) exists for each t ∈ [0,T],
and as a function of t ∈ [0,T] is an element of D[0,T].
The second proposition gives the Itˆo–F¨ollmer formula.
Proposition 6. Let F ∈ C2(R). For all t ∈ [0,T],
(cid:90) t 1 (cid:90) t
F(ω(t)) = F(ω(0)) + F(cid:48)(ω(s−))dω(s) + F(cid:48)(cid:48)(ω(s))d[ω]c
2 s
0 0
(cid:88) (cid:16) (cid:17)
+ ∆F(ω(s)) − F(cid:48)(ω(s−))∆ω(s) .
s∈(0,t]
For the extension of the stochastic integral and the Itˆo–F¨ollmer formula to
the case of ω taking values in Rm, see [6], pp. 147–148. This extension uses the
quadratic covariation processes: see (5.1).
An important development of F¨ollmer’s results is their extension by Cont
and Fourni´e [3] to non-anticipative functionals. The existence of the limit in
(7.1) when f(ω(πn(ω)∧t)) is replaced by g(ω| ), where g is a functional
k [0,πn(ω)∧t]
k
satisfying certain regularity conditions (including being non-anticipative), is es-
tablished in Theorem 4 of [3]. The same theorem gives an Itˆo–F¨ollmer formula
for non-anticipative functionals.
Quadratic variation for other processes
We now state some known results for the existence of quadratic variation for
two kinds of processes different from the basic process W (ω) := ω(t): namely,
t
for functions of the form f(ω(t)), where f ∈ C1(R), and for stochastic integrals
w.r. to ω.
Suppose f ∈ C1(R). F¨ollmer notices in [6] (Remark 2 on p. 148) that a
standard argument in the theory of stochastic integration (as in [10], Theorem
VI.5 on p. 359) implies that the quadratic variation of f(ω) along π exists and
is equal to
(cid:90) t
[f(ω)] = (f(cid:48)(ω(s)))2 d[ω]c + (cid:88) (cid:0) ∆f(ω(s))(cid:1)2 .
t s
0
s∈(0,t]
24

Norvai˘sa’s Theorem 3.26 in [14] implies that the quadratic variation of the
(cid:82)t
stochastic integral Φ(t) := f(ω(s−))dω(s) exists and is equal to
0
(cid:90) t
[Φ] = f2(ω(s−))d[ω] .
t s
0
Suppose that ω ∈ D[0,T] is positive (cf. the second example discussed in
Section 3). In this case it is natural to measure quadratic variation on the
relative rather than absolute scale, and so to consider the quadratic variation of
the logarithm of ω. By F¨ollmer’s result, the quadratic variation process of lnω
is
(cid:90) t d[ω]c
(cid:88) (cid:0) ∆lnω(s)(cid:1)2
[lnω] = s + .
t
ω2(s)
0
s∈(0,t]
By Norvai˘sa’s result, the quadratic variation process of the stochastic logarithm
(cid:82)t dω(s)
Lnω(t) := of ω is
0 ω(s−)
(cid:90) t d[ω]
s
[Lnω] = .
t
ω2(s−)
0
8 Conclusion
In this section we discuss possible directions of further research. This paper
shows the existence of quadratic variation for typical price paths in Ω . It is easy
ψ
to see that Theorem 1 becomes false if we simply set ψ := ∞, but an interesting
question is whether we can set ψ := ∞ if we only consider nonnegative ω (for
many securities, ω ≥ 0 can be assumed from economic considerations).
Another possible way to get rid of the assumption that the jumps of ω are
bounded by a function of ω is to allow trading in American, or binary American,
options to hedge against huge jumps of ω. If the prices of such out-of-the-money
options tend to zero sufficiently fast as their moneyness decreases, we can expect
that the analogue of Theorem 1 will continue to hold even for ψ := ∞.
In Section 4, we proved the existence of quadratic variation only for a specific
array of stopping times (τn). In Section 5, we noticed that the argument of
k
Section 4 works for the class of arrays (τn) which we called arrays of dyadic
k
type and that any two arrays of dyadic type lead to the same values of quadratic
variation for typical ω. It is clear that this observation can be extended to a
much wider class of arrays.
One interpretation of the stochastic integral (7.1) is that it is the capital
of a trading strategy. We, however, also define capital processes directly: see
(3.2) and (3.3). Can all nonnegative capital processes (3.3) be represented
as stochastic integrals? It is clear that the “Markovian” definition (7.1) is not
sufficient (the trading strategy in (7.1) takes into account only the current price),
so this question is about the extension of (7.1) to non-anticipating functionals,
as in [3].
25

Acknowledgments
An earlier version of this paper was the basis of my talk at the 2014 Vilnius
Conference on Probability Theory and Mathematical Statistics (section “Ran-
dom processes”, session “Rough paths”), and I am grateful to the organizers for
inviting me and to the listeners for useful comments, with special thanks to Ri-
mas Norvai˘sa. This research was supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific
Research (grant FA9550-14-1-0043).
References
[1] Patrick Billingsley. Convergence of Probability Measures. Wiley, New York,
1968.
[2] Michel Bruneau. Sur la p-variation des surmartingales. S´eminaire de prob-
abilit´es de Strasbourg, 13:227–232, 1979.
[3] Rama Cont and David-Antoine Fourni´e. Change of variable formulas for
non-anticipative functionals on path space. Journal of Functional Analysis,
259:1043–1072, 2010.
[4] Claude Dellacherie and Paul-Andr´e Meyer. Probabilities and Potential.
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1978. Chapters I–IV. French original: 1975;
reprinted in 2008.
[5] Federal Reserve Board. Credit by brokers and dealers (Regulation T). 12
CFR 220.12, 2014.
[6] Hans F¨ollmer. Calcul d’Itˆo sans probabilit´es. S´eminaire de probabilit´es de
Strasbourg, 15:143–150, 1981.
[7] Hans F¨ollmer and Alexander Schied. Stochastic Finance: An Introduction
in Discrete Time. De Gruyter, Berlin, third edition, 2011.
[8] Peter Fortune. Margin requirements, margin loans, and margin rates: prac-
tice and principles. New England Economic Review, pages 19–44, Septem-
ber/October 2000.
[9] Andrei N. Kolmogorov. Sur la loi des grands nombres. Atti della Reale
Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei. Classe di scienze fisiche, matematiche, e
naturali. Rendiconti Serie VI, 185:917–919, 1929.
[10] Paul-Andr´e Meyer. Un cours sur les int´egrales stochastiques. S´eminaire de
probabilit´es de Strasbourg, 10:245–400, 1976.
[11] Kenshi Miyabe and Akimichi Takemura. Convergence of random series and
the rate of convergence of the strong law of large numbers in game-theoretic
probability. Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 122:1–30, 2012.
26

[12] Kenshi Miyabe and Akimichi Takemura. The law of the iterated logarithm
in game-theoretic probability with quadratic and stronger hedges. Stochas-
tic Processes and their Applications, 123:3132–3152, 2013.
[13] Kenshi Miyabe and Akimichi Takemura. Derandomization in game-
theoretic probability. Stochastic Processes and their Applications, 2014.
To appear.
[14] Rimas Norvai˘sa. Quadratic variation, p-variation and integration with
applications to stock price modelling. Technical Report arXiv:0108090
[math.CA], arXiv.org e-Print archive, August 2001.
[15] Nicolas Perkowski and David J. Pr¨omel. Pathwise stochastic integrals
for model free finance. Technical Report arXiv:1311.6187 [math.PR],
arXiv.org e-Print archive, November 2013.
[16] Nicolas Perkowski and David J. Pr¨omel. Local times for typical price
paths and pathwise Tanaka formulas. Technical Report arXiv:1405.4421
[math.PR], arXiv.org e-Print archive, May 2014.
[17] Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. Probability and Finance: It’s Only a
Game! Wiley, New York, 2001.
[18] Christophe Stricker. Sur la p-variation des surmartingales. S´eminaire de
probabilit´es de Strasbourg, 13:233–237, 1979.
[19] Kei Takeuchi, Masayuki Kumon, and Akimichi Takemura. A new formu-
lation of asset trading games in continuous time with essential forcing of
variation exponent. Bernoulli, 15:1243–1258, 2009.
[20] Vladimir Vovk. A logic of probability, with application to the foundations
of statistics (with discussion). Journal of the Royal Statistical Society B,
55:317–351, 1993.
[21] Vladimir Vovk. Continuous-time trading and the emergence of probabil-
ity. The Game-Theoretic Probability and Finance project, Working Paper
28, http://probabilityandfinance.com, July 2011. Journal version: Fi-
nance and Stochastics, 16:561–609, 2012.
[22] Vladimir Vovk. Rough paths in idealized financial markets. The Game-
Theoretic Probability and Finance project, Working Paper 35, http://
probabilityandfinance.com, arXiv:1005.0279, 2011. Journal version:
Lithuanian Mathematical Journal 51:274–285, 2011.
27