BOUNDARY REGULARITY FOR
THE FRACTIONAL HEAT EQUATION
´
XAVIER FERNANDEZ-REAL AND XAVIER ROS-OTON
4102 voN 03  ]PA.htam[  1v5720.2141:viXra
Abstract. We study the regularity up to the boundary of solutions to fractional
C1,1
heat equation in bounded domains.
More precisely, we consider solutions to ∂ u + (−∆)su = 0 in Ω, t > 0, with
t
Rn L2
zero Dirichlet conditions in \ Ω and with initial data u ∈ (Ω). Using the
0
results of the second author and Serra for the elliptic problem, we show that for
all t > 0 we have u(·,t) ∈ Cs(Rn) and u(·,t)/δs ∈ Cs−ǫ(Ω) for any ǫ > 0 and
δ(x) = dist(x,∂Ω).
Our regularity results apply not only to the fractional Laplacian but also to
more general integro-differential operators, namely those corresponding to stable
L´evy processes.
As a consequence of our results, we show that solutions to the fractional heat
equation satisfy a Pohozaev-type identity for positive times.
1. Introduction and results
The aim of this paper is to study the regularity of solutions to the fractional heat
equation
∂ u + (−∆)su = 0 in Ω, t > 0
t
Rn
(1.1)  u = 0 in \ Ω, t > 0

u(x, 0) = u (x) in Ω, for t = 0,
0
and also to more g eneral nonlocal parabolic equations ∂ u+Lu = 0 in bounded C1,1
t
domains Ω. Here, (−∆)s is the fractional Laplacian, defined by
u(x) − u(y)
(−∆)su(x) = c PV dy
n,s
Z |x − y|n+2s
Rn
for c a normalization constant.
n,s
The regularity of solutions to nonlocal equations is one of the hot topics in non-
linear analysis nowadays. In particular, the regularity of solutions to parabolic
problems like (1.1) or related ones have been studied in [11, 3, 4, 14, 20, 5, 6, 12, 9,
10, 28, 7, 8]. Still, most of these works deal with the interior regularity of solutions,
and there are few results concerning the regularity up to the boundary. This is the
topic of study in this paper.
Key words and phrases. Fractional Laplacian, fractional heat equation, boundary regularity.
∗ This work is part of the bachelor’s degree thesis of the first author.
1

´
2 XAVIER FERNANDEZ-REAL AND XAVIER ROS-OTON
For the elliptic problem
(−∆)su = g(x) in Ω
(1.2)
Rn
(cid:26) u = 0 in \ Ω,
the boundary regularity of solutions is quite well understood, as explained next.
When Ω = B and g ≡ 1, the solution of problem (1.2) has a simple explicit
1
expression. Indeed, this solution is given by u(x) = c(1 − |x|2)s in B , for some
1
constant c > 0. Notice that this solution is not smooth up to the boundary, but it
is only Cs(Ω).
It turns out that this boundary behavior is the same for all solutions, in the sense
that any solution to (1.2) satisfies
(1.3) − Cδs ≤ u ≤ Cδs in Ω,
where δ(x) = dist(x, ∂Ω). Combining this bound with the well known interior
regularity estimates, one finds that u ∈ Cs(Ω) (see Proposition 1.1 in [22]).
Furthermore, for any g ∈ L∞(Ω), the solution u to the elliptic problem (1.2)
satisfies that u/δs is H¨older continuous up to the boundary, and
(1.4) ku/δsk ≤ Ckgk ,
∞
Cα(Ω) L (Ω)
for some α > 0 small. This is the main result of [22].
For the fractional heat equation (1.1), Chen-Kim-Song [11] established sharp two-
sided estimates for the heat kernel of (1.1) in C1,1 domains (see also [3]). Their
estimates yield in particular a bound of the form (1.3) for solutions to (1.1) for
positive times, and this implies that solutions u(x, t) satisfy u(·, t) ∈ Cs(Ω) for
t > 0. Nevertheless, the results in [11, 3] do not yield any estimate like (1.4).
The aim of the present paper is to show that, for t > 0, solutions to (1.1) satisfy
(1.4). Namely, we will show that, for any fixed t > 0, solutions u(x, t) satisfy
0
u(·, t)
sup ≤ C(t )ku k .
0 0 L2(Ω)
(cid:13) δs (cid:13)
t≥t0 (cid:13) (cid:13)Cα(Ω)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
To prove this, we use the results of the second author and Serra [22].
1.1. Main result. As explained next, our main boundary regularity result apply
not only to the fractional Laplacian, but also to more general integro-differential
equations.
Indeed, we consider infinitessimal generators of stable and symmetric L´evy pro-
cesses. These operators are uniquely determined by a finite measure on the unit
sphere Sn−1, often referred as the spectral measure of the process. When this mea-
sure is absolutely continuous, symmetric stable processes have generators of the
form
a(y/|y|)
(1.5) Lu(x) = 2u(x) − u(x + y) − u(x − y) dy,
Z |y|n+2s
Rn
(cid:0) (cid:1)

BOUNDARY REGULARITY FOR THE FRACTIONAL HEAT EQUATION 3
where s ∈ (0, 1) and a is any nonnegative function in L1(Sn−1) satisfying a(θ) =
a(−θ) for θ ∈ Sn−1.
The most simple and important case of stable process is the fractional Laplacian,
whose spectral measure is constant on Sn−1 (so that the process is isotropic).
The regularity theory for general operators of the form (1.5) has been recently
developed by the second author and Serra in [26]; see also [25]. Using the boundary
regularity results established in [26], we will show the following.
This is the main result of the present paper.
Theorem 1.1. Let Ω ⊂ Rn be any bounded C1,1 domain, and s ∈ (0, 1). Let L be
any operator of the form (1.5) and satisfying the ellipticity conditions
(1.6) Λ ≤ inf |ν · θ|2sa(θ)dθ, 0 ≤ a(θ) ≤ Λ for all θ ∈ Sn−1,
1 2
ν∈Sn−1 Z
Sn−1
where Λ and Λ are positive constants.
1 2
Let u ∈ L2(Ω), and let u be the solution to
0
∂ u + Lu = 0 in Ω, t > 0
t
Rn
(1.7)  u = 0 in \ Ω, t > 0

u(x, 0) = u (x) in Ω, for t = 0.
0
Then, 
(a) For each t > 0,
0
(1.8) sup ku(·, t)k ≤ C (t )ku k .
Cs(Rn) 1 0 0 L2(Ω)
t≥t0
(b) For each t > 0,
0
u(·, t)
(1.9) sup ≤ C (t )ku k ,
2 0 0 L2(Ω)
(cid:13) δs (cid:13)
t≥t0 (cid:13)Cs−ǫ(Ω)
(cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
where δ(x) = dist(x(cid:13), ∂Ω), a(cid:13)nd for any ǫ > 0.
The constants C and C depend only on t , n, s, ǫ, Ω, and the ellipticity constants
1 2 0
Λ and Λ . Moreover, these constants C and C blow up as t ↓ 0.
1 2 1 2 0
The main result is the second part of the Theorem —the H¨older regularity of
u/ds up to the boundary. As explained above, this is new even for the fractional
Laplacian.
Notice that our result applies to spectral measures that may vanish in a subset
of Sn−1. In fact, the spectral measure could even be of the form a = χ , where
Σ
Σ ⊂ Sn−1 is any subset with |Σ| > 0 and such that Σ = −Σ.
The main idea of the proof is to write the solution of the heat equation in terms
of the eigenfunctions, check that these eigenfunctions fulfil bounds of the form (1.8)-
(1.9), and deduce the desired result. Still, the proof is not immediate, since one has
to prove first that the eigenfunctions belong to L∞, with an explicit bound of the
form kφ k ≤ Ckq for some fixed exponent q, and being φ the k-th eigenfunction.
∞
k L k

´
4 XAVIER FERNANDEZ-REAL AND XAVIER ROS-OTON
To do this, we need to establish the following result, which may be of independent
interest.
Proposition 1.2. Let Ω ⊂ Rn be any bounded domain, s ∈ (0, 1), g ∈ L2(Ω), and
u be the weak solution of
Lu = g in Ω
(1.10)
Rn
(cid:26) u = 0 in \ Ω,
where L is a nonlocal operator of the form (1.5) and (1.6). Assume in addition that
g ∈ Lp(Ω). Then,
(a) If 1 < p < n ,
2s
np
kuk ≤ Ckgk , q = ,
Lq(Ω) Lp(Ω)
n − 2ps
where C is a constant depending only on n, s, p and Λ .
2
(b) If p = n ,
2s
kuk ≤ Ckgk , ∀q < ∞,
Lq(Ω) Lp(Ω)
where C is a constant depending only on n, s, q, Ω and Λ .
2
(c) If n < p < ∞,
2s
kuk ≤ Ckgk ,
L∞ (Ω) Lp(Ω)
where C is a constant depending only on n, s, p, Ω and Λ .
2
To prove this, we use the results of [17] to compare the fundamental solution
associated to the operator L with the one of the fractional Laplacian.
1.2. Applications of the main result. For second order equations, important
tools when studying linear and semilinear problems in bounded domains are integration-
by-parts-type identities. For the Laplacian operator, one can easily check that any
solution u with u = 0 on ∂Ω satisfies
2
n − 2 1 ∂u
(1.11) (x · ∇u)∆u dx + u∆u dx = (x · ν)dσ.
Z 2 Z 2 Z (cid:18)∂ν (cid:19)
Ω Ω ∂Ω
This identity was used originally by Pohozaev to prove nonexistence results for
semilinear equations −∆u = λf(u), and identities of this type are commonly used
in the analysis of PDEs.
For nonlocal operators, the second author and Serra found and established the
fractional analogue this identity in [23]: if u is any bounded solution to (1.2), then
u/ds is H¨older continuous in Ω, and
(1.12)
n − 2s Γ(1 + s)2 u 2
− (x · ∇u)(−∆)su dx − u(−∆)su dx = (x · ν)dσ.
Z 2 Z 2 Z ds
Ω Ω ∂Ω (cid:16) (cid:17)
Note that the boundary term u/ds| has to be understood in the limit sense —recall
∂Ω
that we showed that u/ds is continuous up to the boundary.

BOUNDARY REGULARITY FOR THE FRACTIONAL HEAT EQUATION 5
Here, thanks to Theorem 1.1 and the results in [23], we are able to prove the
Pohozaev identity for solutions to the fractional heat equation (1.1). The result
reads as follows.
Corollary 1.3. Let Ω ⊂ Rn be any bounded C1,1 domain, and s ∈ (0, 1). Let
u ∈ L2(Ω), and let u(x, t) be the solution to the fractional heat equation (1.1).
0
Then, for any fixed t > 0, the identity (1.12) holds, with u = u(·, t).
In [23] the authors prove that the general Pohozaev identity holds whenever a
function fulfils certain regularity hypotheses. In particular, they check that these
hypotheses are fulfilled by the solutions of the elliptic problem, and so it follows
their result. In the present paper we will check that the same hypotheses are also
fulfilled by the solutions to the fractional heat equation (1.1), using the results by
the second author and Serra, and therefore these functions also fulfil the general
Pohozaev identity. To do this, an essential ingredient is Theorem 1.1, since for the
right-hand side of the identity to be well-defined we need that u/δs can be extended
continuously up to the boundary.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we prove previous results regarding
the existence of eigenfunctions for the Dirichlet elliptic problem and the asymptotic
behavior of their eigenvalues. In Section 3 we prove the main result that will be
used regarding the regularity of the eigenfunctions. In Section 4 we prove Theorem
1.1. In Section 5 we prove Corollary 1.3.
2. Existence of eigenfunctions and asymptotic behavior of
eigenvalues
The results proved in this section hold for general stable operators, with any
spectral measure a ∈ L1(Sn−1).
The aim of this section is to prove the following, referring to the elliptic problem
Lφ = λφ in Ω
(2.1)
Rn
(cid:26) φ = 0 in \ Ω.
Rn
Proposition 2.1. Let Ω ⊂ be any bounded domain, and L an operator of the
form (1.5), with a ∈ L1(Sn−1). Then,
(a) There exist a sequence of eigenfunctions forming a Hilbert basis of L2.
(b) If {λ } is the sequence of eigenvalues associated to the eigenfunctions of
k k∈N
L in increasing order, then
k−2s
lim λ = C ,
n
k 0
k→∞
for some constant C depending only on n, s, Ω and L. Moreover,
0
C(µ ) ≤ C ≤ C(µ ),
2 0 1

´
6 XAVIER FERNANDEZ-REAL AND XAVIER ROS-OTON
for C(µ ) and C(µ ) positive constants depending only on n, s, Ω and µ
1 2 1
and µ respectively; where µ > 0 and µ > 0 are given by the expressions
2 1 2
(2.2) µ = a(θ)dθ, µ = inf |ν · θ|2sa(θ)dθ.
2 1
Z ν∈Sn−1 Z
Sn−1 Sn−1
For the fractional Laplacian, the result in Proposition 2.1 is well known, and was
already proved in the sixties; see [1] and also [15].
For general stable operators L, the asymptotic behavior of its eigenvalues follows
from the following result by Geisinger [16].
Given an operator L, we denote by A(ξ) its Fourier symbol (i.e., Lu(ξ) = A(ξ)uˆ(ξ)).
For the fractional Laplacian, we recall that A(ξ) = |ξ|2s.
c
Let us state the result by Geisinger, first introducing two hypotheses on A.
Rn R
(1) There is a function A : → with the following three properties. A is
0 0
homogeneous of degree α > 0: A (νξ) = ναA (ξ) for ξ ∈ Rn and ν > 0. The
0 0
Rn
set of ξ ∈ with A (ξ) < 1 has finite Lebesgue-measure, and the function
0
A fulfils
0
lim ν−αA(νξ) = A (ξ),
0
ν→∞
with uniform convergence in ξ.
N Rn,
(2) There are constants C > 0 and M ∈ such that for all η ∈
∗
1
sup (A(ξ + η) + A(ξ − η)) − A(ξ) ≤ C (1 + |η|)M.
∗
(cid:18)2 (cid:19)
ξ∈Rn
Under these two conditions, we have the following.
Rn
Theorem 2.2 ([16]). Let Ω ⊂ be an open set of finite volume and assume that A
is the symbol of a differential operator L that satisfies the previous two conditions.
Then,
k−2s
lim λ = C ,
n
k L,Ω
k→∞
where
2s −2s/n −2s/n
C = (2π) |Ω| V ,
L,Ω L
and
Rn
V = |{ξ ∈ : A (ξ) < 1}| .
L 0
To prove Proposition 2.1, we only have to check that any stable operator (1.5)
fulfils the previous conditions. To do so, we use that the Fourier symbol A(ξ) of L
can be explicitly written in terms of s and the spectral measure a, as
A(ξ) = |ξ · θ|2sa(θ)dθ;
Z
Sn−1
see for example [27].
Using this expression, it is clear that
0 < µ |ξ|2s ≤ A(ξ) ≤ µ |ξ|2s,
1 2

BOUNDARY REGULARITY FOR THE FRACTIONAL HEAT EQUATION 7
where µ and µ are given by (2.2). Notice that these constants are strictly positive
1 2
for any stable operator with a ∈ L1(Sn−1).
We can now proceed to prove Proposition 2.1.
Proof of Proposition 2.1. The first statement is well known, and follows, for exam-
ple, seeing that the norms Hs and Hs are equivalent in Rn, which can be done easily
L
in the Fourier side. Here, Hs stands for the Hs norm associated to the operator L,
L
given by:
1 (u(x) − u(x + y))2 y
2
kuk := kuk + [u] , [u] := a dxdy,
H Ls L2 H Ls H Ls 2 Z Z |y|n+2s (cid:18)|y|(cid:19)
Rn Rn
where [u] is the Gagliardo seminorm associated to the operator L. In the Fourier
Hs
L
side, it can we written as
2 2
[u] = A(ξ)uˆ (ξ)dξ.
Hs
L Z Rn
For the second statement we use Theorem 2.2.
Indeed, let A be the Fourier symbol of the stable operator L. It is enough to
check the two conditions of the theorem by Geisinger. The first condition trivially
holds taking A = A, since it is homogeneous, and we have the previous bounds.
0
We need to check the second condition. To do so we claim that, for any a ≥ b ≥ 0
and s ∈ (0, 1), we have
(2.3) 2a2s + 2b2s ≥ (a + b)2s + (a − b)2s.
Indeed, since s ∈ (0, 1), by concavity we have
(a + b)2s + (a − b)2s =(a2 + b2 + 2ab)s + (a2 + b2 − 2ab)s
≤2(a2 + b2)s
≤2(a2s + b2s),
as claimed.
Thus, using (2.3), we find
|ξ · θ + η · θ|2s + |ξ · θ − η · θ|2s ≤ 2|ξ · θ|2s + 2|η · θ|2s,
and therefore,
A(ξ + η)+A(ξ − η) − 2A(ξ) =
= |ξ · θ + η · θ|2s + |ξ · θ − η · θ|2s − 2|ξ · θ|2s a(θ)dθ
Z
Sn−1
(cid:8) (cid:9)
≤ 2 |η · θ|2sa(θ)dθ ≤ 2|η|2sµ ,
2
Z
Sn−1
as desired.
Finally, we know that
(2π)2s|Ω|−2 ns Rn 1}|−2 ns
C = |{ξ ∈ : A(ξ) < ,
0

´
8 XAVIER FERNANDEZ-REAL AND XAVIER ROS-OTON
and hence, using the bounds on A, we obtain
1 1
2s − 2s −
(2π)2s|Ω|− V (µ 2s) ≤ C ≤ (2π)2s|Ω|− V (µ 2s),
n n
n 2 0 n 1
(cid:3)
where V (R) denotes the volume of an n-ball with radius R.
n
3. Regularity of eigenfunctions
The aim of this section is to prove the following.
Rn
Proposition 3.1. Let Ω ⊂ be any bounded domain, s ∈ (0, 1), and L an operator
of the form (1.5)-(1.6).
Let φ be any solution to
Lφ = λφ in Ω
(3.1)
Rn
(cid:26) φ = 0 in \ Ω,
Then, φ ∈ L∞(Ω), and
kφk ≤ Cλw−1kφk ,
L∞ (Ω) L2(Ω)
for some constant C depending only on n, s, Ω and the ellipticity constant Λ , and
2
N
some w ∈ depending only on n and s.
Remark 3.2. When Ω and the spectral measure a are C∞, a very similar result has
been found recently in [18, Theorem 2.3], which follows using the results of [19].
Combining Proposition 3.1 with the boundary regularity results in [26], we will
obtain the following.
Corollary 3.3. Let Ω ⊂ Rn be any bounded C1,1 domain, s ∈ (0, 1), and L an
operator of the form (1.5)-(1.6).
Let φ be any solution to (3.1). Then, φ ∈ Cs(Rn) and φ/δs ∈ Cs−ǫ(Ω) for any
ǫ > 0, with the estimates
kφk ≤ Cλwkφk ,
Cs(Rn) L2(Ω)
kφ/δsk ≤ Cλwkφk .
Cs−ǫ(Ω) L2(Ω)
The constant C depends only on n, s, Ω, ǫ and the ellipticity constants Λ and Λ ,
1 2
N
and w ∈ , depends only on n and s.
Proposition 3.1 will follow from Proposition 1.2 and a bootstrap argument. We
next prove Proposition 1.2.
The following lemma will be essential. It is an immediate consequence of the
results of [17].
Lemma 3.4. Let s ∈ (0, 1) and n > 2s. Let L be any operator of the form (1.5)-
(1.6).

BOUNDARY REGULARITY FOR THE FRACTIONAL HEAT EQUATION 9
Rn.
Then, there exists a function V which is fundamental solution of L in Namely,
L1(Rn)
for all g ∈ with appropriate decay at infinity, the function
u(x) = g(y)V (x − y)dy
Z
Rn
satisfies
Rn.
Lu = g in
In addition, the function V satisfies the bound
c
2
V (x) ≤
|x|n−2s
for some c positive constant depending only on n, s and Λ .
2 2
Proof. It was proved in [17] that the heat kernel of the operator L satisfies
C
p(x, 1) ≤
1 + |x|n+2s
Rn
for all x ∈ and t > 0. Moreover, we also have the scaling property
p(x, t) = t− n p(t− 1 x, 1).
2s 2s
Then, since n > 2s, the function
+∞
V (x) = p(x, t)dt
Z
0
is well defined, and it satisfies
x
V (x) = |x|2s−nV .
(cid:18)|x|(cid:19)
Finally, it also follows from the upper bound on p(x, t) that for |x| = 1 we have
(cid:3)
V (x) ≤ C, and thus the lemma follows.
By the previous lemma, we can define L−1 as the operator
L−1g(x) = g(y)V (x − y)dy.
Z
Rn
For this operator, we have the following.
Lemma 3.5. Let s ∈ (0, 1) and n > 2s. Let L be any operator of the form (1.5)-
(1.6).
Let g and u be such that u = L−1g in Rn. Suppose g ∈ Lp(Rn), with 1 ≤ p < n .
2s
Then,
np
kuk ≤ Ckgk , q = ,
Lq(Rn) Lp(Rn)
n − 2ps
for some constant C depending only on n, s, p and Λ .
2

´
10 XAVIER FERNANDEZ-REAL AND XAVIER ROS-OTON
Proof. Let us first recall the well known Hardy-Littlewood-Sobolev inequality. It
Lp(Rn),
states that, if f ∈ then
np
kI fk ≤ Ckfk , q = ,
2s Lq(Rn) Lp(Rn)
n − 2ps
for some constant C depending only on p, n and s. Here, I f stands for the Riesz
2s
potential, defined by
f(y)
(I f)(x) = C dy.
2s n,s
Z |x − y|n−2s
Rn
We now bound |u| by some expression equivalent to a Riesz potential of g, in
order to use the Hardy-Littlewood-Sobolev inequality. Since
u(x) = L−1g(x) = g(y)V (x − y)dy
Z
Rn
and 0 ≤ V (x − y) ≤ c2 , we have
|x−y|n−2s
c
2
|u(x)| ≤ |g(y)|V (x − y)dy ≤ |g(y)| dy = C(I |g|)(x).
2s
Z Z |x − y|n−2s
Rn Rn
Thus, we find
np
′
kuk ≤ C kI |g|k ≤ Ckgk , q = ,
Lq(Rn) 2s Lq(Rn) Lp(Rn)
n − 2ps
(cid:3)
as we wanted to see.
We can now prove Proposition 1.2 for a general operator L of the form (1.5) and
(1.6).
Proof of Proposition 1.2. First, notice that if n ≤ 2s, then n = 1. In this case any
stable operator (1.5) is the fractional Laplacian, for which Proposition 1.2 is known
(see for example [24]). Thus, from now on we assume that n > 2s.
(a) Consider the problem
Rn,
Lv = |g| in
Rn
where g has been extended from Ω to by zero. We know that there is a v ≥ 0
solving the problem, since we can define
v(x) = |g(y)|V (x − y)dy ≥ 0.
Z
Ω
Now, using the comparison principle we have −v ≤ u ≤ v, since |g| ≥ g ≥ −|g|.
This means kvk ≥ kuk , and by Lemma 3.5 we have that
Lq(Rn) Lq(Ω)
np
kvk ≤ Ckgk , q = ,
Lq(Rn) Lp(Rn)
n − 2ps
just like we wanted to see.
(b) It follows using part (a), and making p ↑ n using that
2s
n
kgk ≤ Ckgk , r = ,
Lp(Ω) Lr(Ω)
2s

BOUNDARY REGULARITY FOR THE FRACTIONAL HEAT EQUATION 11
by H¨older’s inequality on bounded domains.
(c) Define v as before, so that using H¨older’s inequality
′
1/p
′
0 ≤ |u(x)| ≤ v(x) = |g(y)|V (x − y)dy ≤ kgk V (x − y)p dy ,
Lp(Ω)
Z (cid:18)Z (cid:19)
Ω Ω
′
where 1 + 1 = 1. We now want to bound V (x − y)p dy. Consider B (0) a ball
′ R
p p Ω
centred at the origin such that Ω ⊂ B (eRxists because Ω is bounded). Then we
R
want to see whether the following integral converges,
′
V (y)p dy,
Z
B (0)
R
which will be enough by seeing that
1
dy < ∞,
′
Z |y|(n−2s)p
B (0)
R
and this last integral converges because p > n .
2s
Therefore, we reach
kuk ≤ Ckgk ,
L∞ (Ω) Lp(Ω)
(cid:3)
for some constant C depending only on n, s, p, Λ and Ω.
2
Finally, we prove next Proposition 3.1 and Corollary 3.3.
Proof of Proposition 3.1. In order to prove this result, consider the problem (1.10),
with g = λφ, being φ an eigenfunction and λ its eigenvalue. We already know that
φ ∈ L2(Ω). If n < 2, apply Proposition 1.2 third result, (c), with p = 2 to get
2s
kφk ≤ Cλkφk .
L∞ (Ω) L2(Ω)
If n = 2, first use the second result, (b), from Proposition 1.2 and consider q > n ,
2s 2s
which reduces to the previous case. Therefore, in this situation w = 3.
Suppose n > 2. Apply Proposition 1.2, first result, (a).
2s
np
kφk ≤ Cλkφk , q = .
Lq(Ω) Lp(Ω)
n − 2ps
Now the constant C does not depend on λ. If φ ∈ Lp(Ω), then φ ∈ Lq(Ω) (for
2 ≤ p < n ). Take an initial p = 2.
0
2s
np
Define p = k . This sequence is obviously increasing, has no fixed points
k+1
n−2p s
k
while n > 2p s and implies the following chain of inequalities,
k
C(0)kφk ≥ C(1)λ−1kφk ≥ · · · ≥ C(k+1)λ−k−1kφk .
Lp0(Ω) Lp1(Ω) Lp k+1(Ω)
As long as n > 2p s. Define N as the index of the first time n ≤ 2p s. We know
k N
′
that φ ∈ Lp N(Ω), with p ≥ n . If p = n , consider p′ = p − ǫ, then q = np N
N 2s N 2s N N n−2p′ s
N
is, for some ǫ > 0, larger than n . It is possible to conclude that φ ∈ LQ(Ω), for
2s
some Q > n .
2s

´
12 XAVIER FERNANDEZ-REAL AND XAVIER ROS-OTON
Now use the third result from Proposition 1.2, to see φ ∈ L∞(Ω).
kφk ≤ Cλkφk ,
L∞ (Ω) Lp N(Ω)
which by the previous chain of inequalities implies
kφk ≤ Cλw−1kφk ,
L∞ (Ω) L2(Ω)
where w = N + 2 if p > n and w = N + 3 if p = n ; as we wanted to see. (cid:3)
N N
2s 2s
(cid:3)
Proof of Corollary 3.3. It follows using Proposition 3.1 and [26].
4. Proof of Theorem 1.1
The aim of this section is to prove the main result of the present paper, Theorem
1.1. After that, we will also give a Corollary concerning the regularity up to the
boundary of the solution u(x, t) in the t-variable; see Corollary 4.1.
Proof of Theorem 1.1. Let us prove (b). The result corresponding to (a) will follow
proceeding exactly the same way.
First, by Proposition 2.1 the solution u can be expressed as
u(x, t) = u φ e−λ kt,
k k
X
k>0
which follows immediately by separation of variables and imposing the initial con-
dition u = u φ . Here, φ denote the unitary eigenfunctions of the Dirichlet
0 k>0 k k k
elliptic problem, and λ the corresponding eigenvalues, in increasing order.
P
k
Notice that we already know that the solution will always be in L2(Ω), since the
L2 norm is decreasing with time.
We then try to bound ku(·, t)/δsk for any fixed ǫ > 0, through the expression
Cs−ǫ(Ω)
found in Corollary 3.3, and noticing that the sequence |u | has a maximum (since
k
it converges to 0) and it satisfies max |u | ≤ ku k ,
k>0 k 0 L2(Ω)
u(·, t) φ
k −λ t
= u e k
(cid:13) k (cid:13)
(cid:13) δs (cid:13) δs
(cid:13) (cid:13)Cs−ǫ(Ω) (cid:13) (cid:13)X k>0 (cid:13) (cid:13)Cs−ǫ(Ω)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
(cid:13) φ (cid:13)
≤ |u | k e−λ kt
k
(cid:13) δs (cid:13)
X (cid:13) (cid:13)Cs−ǫ(Ω)
k>0
(cid:13) (cid:13)
≤ ku k (cid:13) (cid:13) C kφ k e−λ kt
0 L2(Ω) λ k L2(Ω)
k
X
k>0
= ku k C λwe−λ kt.
0 L2(Ω) k
X
k>0
We have bounded ku(·, t)/δsk by an expression decreasing with time (since
Cs−ǫ(Ω)
λ > 0 always), and where C depends only on n, s, Ω, Λ , Λ and ǫ. Therefore,
k 1 2
it is only needed to consider ku(·, t )/δsk and bound it using the previous
0 Cs−ǫ(Ω)
expression.

BOUNDARY REGULARITY FOR THE FRACTIONAL HEAT EQUATION 13
So it is enough to prove the convergence of the series λwe−λ kt0 considering
k>0 k
the asymptotics previously introduced. Let us study the convergence of the tail.
P
There exists k such that
0
w
3 2s
2s 1
λwe−λ kt0 < C k e− 2C0k n t0
n
k 0
(cid:18)2 (cid:19)
X X
k≥k0 k≥k0
w
3
Cw kγw e− 21 C0kγt0,
=
0
(cid:18)2(cid:19)
X
k≥k0
where it has been used the notation and the results from Proposition 2.1. The
notation has been simplified, γ = 2s.
n
As well as that, the qualitative convergence with respect to t , as t goes to 0, is
0 0
the same in the last and in the first expression. In order to check the convergence we
use the integral criterion, changing variables y = xγ, and z = 1C yt ; and defining
0 0
2
β := w + 1−γ = w + n − 1,
γ 2s
∞ ∞
xγwe−1 2C0xγt0dx =1 yw+1− γγ e− 21 C0yt0dy
Z γ Z
γ
k0 k
0
2β+1 ∞
= zβe−zdz < C′(µ ) < +∞,
2
γCβ+1 tβ+1 Z
1 γ
2C0t0k
0 0 0
for some constant C′(µ ) depending on n, s, Ω and µ (which can be bound by
2 2
an expression depending on Λ ). Notice that it has been possible to bound the
2
expression since t > 0. For t = 0 the previous procedure is not appropriate, which
0 0
is consistent with the fact that the initial condition does not fulfil that u /δs is in
0
Cs−ǫ(Ω). That is, fixed t > 0,
0
ku(·, t )/δsk ≤ C(t )ku k ,
0 Cs−ǫ(Ω) 0 0 L2(Ω)
where C(t ) depends only on n, s, Ω, ǫ, the ellipticity constants Λ and Λ and t .
0 1 2 0
−w− n
The dependence on t has been found before, as t approaches 0: C(t ) = O(t 2s),
0 0 0 0
for t ↓ 0.
0
Finally, to prove (a), we use the same argument as used in (b), but now consider
ku(·, t)k = u φ e−λ kt ,
Cs(Rn) (cid:13) k k (cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
X
(cid:13)k>0 (cid:13)Cs(Rn)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
and follow the same way, to see that(cid:13)ku(·, t)k (cid:13)is bounded by an expression
Cs(Rn)
(cid:3)
equivalent to the one found for (b).
At this point we can give the following result.
Corollary 4.1. The solution to the fractional heat equation for general nonlocal
operators (1.7), u, where L is of the form (1.5) and (1.6) for an initial condition at
t = 0, u(x, 0) = u (x) ∈ L2(Ω), and for a C1,1 bounded domain Ω, satisfies that
0

´
14 XAVIER FERNANDEZ-REAL AND XAVIER ROS-OTON
(1) For each t > 0,
0
∂ju
(j) N
sup (·, t) ≤ C ku k , ∀j ∈
(cid:13) ∂tj (cid:13) 1 0 L2(Ω)
t≥t0 (cid:13)Cs(Rn)
(cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
(2) For each t > 0,(cid:13) (cid:13)
0
1 ∂ju
(j) N
sup (·, t) ≤ C ku k , ∀j ∈
(cid:13)δs ∂tj (cid:13) 2 0 L2(Ω)
t≥t0 (cid:13)Cs−ǫ(Ω)
(cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
where δ(x) = d(cid:13)ist(x, ∂Ω), (cid:13)and for any ǫ > 0.
(j) (j)
The constants C and C depend only on t , n, s, j, the ellipticity constants Λ
1 2 0 1
(j)
and Λ and Ω (and C also on ǫ), and blow up as t ↓ 0.
2 2 0
Proof. To prove this corollary we can simply use the same argument used in the proof
∂ju(·,
of Theorem 1.1, but now considering the expression of t) obtained deriving
∂tj
term by term,
∂ju
j j −λ t
(·, t) = (−1) λ u φ (x)e k .
∂tj k k k
X
k>0
The temporal derivation term by term can be done because the series expansion
R+.
is uniformly convergent with respect to time over compact subsets in
(cid:3)
Now proceed with the proof of Theorem 1.1 using w + j instead of w.
5. The Pohozaev identity for solutions to the fractional heat
equation
In this section we prove Corollary 1.3.
The main result we will need, corresponding to [23, Proposition 1.6], is the fol-
lowing. We define Ω = {x ∈ Ω : δ(x) ≥ ρ}.
ρ
Theorem 5.1 ([23]). Let Ω be a bounded and C1,1 domain. Assume that u is a
Hs(Rn) Rn
function which vanishes in \ Ω, and satisfies
(a) u ∈ Cs(Rn) and, for every β ∈ [s, 1 + 2s), u is of class Cβ(Ω) and
[u] ≤ Cρs−β, ∀ρ ∈ (0, 1).
Cβ(Ω )
ρ
(b) The function u/δs| can be continuously extended to Ω. Moreover, there
Ω
exists α ∈ (0, 1) such that u/δs ∈ Cα(Ω). In addition, for all β ∈ [α, s + α],
it holds the estimate
[u/δs] ≤ Cρα−β, ∀ρ ∈ (0, 1).
Cβ(Ω )
ρ
(c) (−∆)su is bounded in Ω.
Then, the following identity holds
2s − n Γ(1 + s)2 u 2
(x · ∇u)(−∆)sudx = u(−∆)sudx − (x · ν)dσ,
Z 2 Z 2 Z δs
Ω Ω ∂Ω (cid:16) (cid:17)
where ν is the unit outward normal to ∂Ω at x, and Γ is the Gamma function.

BOUNDARY REGULARITY FOR THE FRACTIONAL HEAT EQUATION 15
By the results in [22], any bounded solution to the elliptic problem (−∆)su =
f(x, u) in Ω satisfies the hypotheses of the previous result. Using the results in [22],
we show here that the same happens for solutions to the fractional heat equation
∂ u + (−∆)su = 0 in Ω.
t
Proof of Corollary 1.3. In Theorem 1.1 we have checked that indeed u(·, t)/δs can be
extended continuously up to the boundary for positive times, so that the boundary
integral makes sense.
For the fixed t > 0, we will use Theorem 5.1 to prove the identity. It is enough
to check that the hypothesis are fulfilled. Firstly, u for positive times is always in
Hs(Rn),
since it is a solution of the fractional heat equation. In addition, to check
the third hypothesis we could see that ∂ u = −(−∆)su and in Corollary 4.1 we had
t
Cs(Rn)
shown that all temporal derivatives are for positive times, so in particular,
are uniformly bounded in Ω.
In order to check hypothesis (a) and (b), we will use the result [22, Corollary 1.6],
where there is stated that any solution of the elliptic problem (−∆)su = f(x, u) in
0,1 R
Ω, for f ∈ C (Ω × ), satisfies the hypotheses, for α and C depending only on
loc
s, Ω, f, kuk and β. Moreover, from the proof of this result one can see that
L∞ (Rn)
¯ ¯
if f(x, u) = λu, then C = Cλkuk , where C depends only on Ω, s, n and β.
∞
L (Ω)
Therefore, considering the eigenvalue-eigenfunction problem we have,
[φ ] ≤ Cλ kφ k ρs−β, ∀ρ ∈ (0, 1), β ∈ [s, 1 + 2s),
k Cβ(Ω ) k k L∞ (Ω)
ρ
and
[φ /δs] ≤ Cλ kφ k ρα−β, ∀ρ ∈ (0, 1), β ∈ [α, s + α],
k Cβ(Ω ) k k L∞ (Ω)
ρ
where φ is the k-th eigenfunction of the fractional Laplacian problem in Ω, and C
k
depends only on n, s, Ω and β. Proceed like in the proof of Theorem 1.1, expressing
u(x, t) = u φ e−λ kt, being u the coefficients of u in the basis {φ } ,
k>0 k k k 0 k k>0
P
[u(·, t)] ≤ u k[φ k] )e−λ kt ≤ Cρs−β u kλ kkφ kk (Ω)e−λ kt,
Cβ(Ω ) Cβ(Ω L∞
ρ ρ
X X
k>0 k>0
similarly,
[u(·, t)/δs] ≤ Cρα−β u kλ kkφ kk (Ω)e−λ kt.
Cβ(Ω ) L∞
ρ
X
k>0
Now, we recall the result from Proposition 3.1, which stated
kφ k ≤ Cλw−1kφ k
k L∞ (Ω) k k L2(Ω)
N
for some w ∈ , and C depending only on n, s and Ω. Hence, assuming unitary
eigenfunctions,
s−β w −λ t
[u(·, t)] ≤ Cρ u λ e k
Cβ(Ω ρ) k k
X
k>0
and
[u(·, t)/δs] ≤ Cρα−β u λwe−λ kt.
Cβ(Ω ρ) k k
X
k>0

´
16 XAVIER FERNANDEZ-REAL AND XAVIER ROS-OTON
Which are expressions almost identical to the ones found in the proof of Theorem
1.1. Proceeding the same way, we reach
[u(·, t)] ≤ C(t)ku k ρs−β,
Cβ(Ω ) 0 L2(Ω)
ρ
and
[u(·, t)/δs] ≤ C(t)ku k ρα−β,
Cβ(Ω ) 0 L2(Ω)
ρ
for some constant C(t) depending only on n, s, Ω, β and t, that blows up when
t ↓ 0. So, for any fixed t > 0, we have seen that hypothesis of Corollary 1.3 are
fulfilled, and therefore,
2s − n Γ(1 + s)2 u 2
s s
(x · ∇u)(−∆) udx = u(−∆) udx − (x · ν)dσ,
Z 2 Z 2 Z δs
Ω Ω ∂Ω (cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:3)
where we have now again used that u = u(·, t) for a fixed t > 0.
References
[1] R. M. Blumenthal, R. K. Getoor, The asymptotic distribution of the eigenvalues for a class
of Markov operators, Pacific J. Math. 9 (1959), 399-408.
[2] R. M. Blumenthal, R. K. Getoor, D. B. Ray, On the distribution of first hits for the symmetric
stable processes, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 99 (1961), 540-554.
[3] K. Bogdan, T. Grzywny, M. Ryznar, Heat kernel estimates for the fractional Laplacian with
Dirichlet conditions, Ann. of Prob. 38 (2010), 1901-1923.
[4] L. Caffarelli, C. H. Chan, A. Vasseur, Regularity theory for parabolic nonlinear integral oper-
ators, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 24 (2011), 849-869.
[5] L. Caffarelli, J. L. Vazquez, Nonlinear porous medium flow with fractional potential pressure,
Arch. Rat. Mech. Anal. 202 (2011), 537-565.
[6] L. Caffarelli, F. Soria and J. L. Va´zquez Regularity of solutions of the fractional porous medium
flow, to appear in Journal Europ. Math. Society.
[7] L. Caffarelli, A. Vasseur, Drift diffusion equations with fractional diffusion and the quasi-
geostrophic equation, Ann. of Math. 171 (2010), 1903-1930.
[8] L. Caffarelli, A. Figalli, Regularity of solutions to the parabolic fractional obstacle problem, J.
Reine Angew. Math., 680 (2013), 191-233.
[9] H. Chang-Lara, G. Davila, Regularity for solutions of nonlocal parabolic equations, Calc. Var.
Partial Differential Equations 49 (2014), 139-172.
[10] H. Chang-Lara, G. Davila, Regularity for solutions of nonlocal parabolic equations II, J. Dif-
ferential Equations 256 (2014), 130-156.
[11] Z. Chen, P. Kim, R. Song, Heat kernel estimates for the Dirichlet fractional Laplacian, J. Eur.
Math. Soc. 12 (2010), 1307-1329.
[12] A. De Pablo, F. Quiro´s, A. Rodr´ıguez and J. L. Va´zquez A general fractional porous medium
equation Comm. Pure Applied Mathematics, 65 (2012), 1242-1284.
[13] E. Di Nezza, G. Palatucci, E. Valdinoci, Hitchhiker’s guide to the fractional Sobolev spaces,
Bull. Sci. Math., 136 (2012), 521-573.
[14] M. Felsinger, M. Kassmann, Local regularity for parabolic nonlocal operators, Comm. PDE 38
(2013), 1539-1573.
[15] R. Frank, L. Geisinger, Refined semiclassical asymptotics for fractional powers of the Laplace
operator, J. Reine Angew. Math., to appear.
[16] L. Geisinger, A short proof of Weyl’s law for fractional differential operators, J. Math. Phys.
55 (2014), 011504.

BOUNDARY REGULARITY FOR THE FRACTIONAL HEAT EQUATION 17
[17] P. Glowacki, W. Hebisch, Pointwise estimates for densities of stable semigroups of measures,
Studia Math. 104 (1992), 243-258.
[18] G. Grubb, Spectral results for mixed problems and fractional elliptic operators, preprint arXiv
(Jul. 2014).
[19] G. Grubb, Fractional Laplacians on domains, a development of Ho¨rmander’s theory of mu-
transmission pseudodifferential operators, Adv. Math., accepted (2014).
[20] M. Kassmann, R. W. Schwab, Regularity results for nonlocal parabolic equations, Riv. Mat.
Univ. Parma 5 (2014), 183-212.
[21] S. I. Pohozaev, On the eigenfunctions of the equation ∆u + λf(u) = 0, Dokl. Akad. Nauk
SSSR 165 (1965), 1408-1411.
[22] X. Ros-Oton, J. Serra, The Dirichlet problem for the fractional Laplacian: regularity up to the
boundary, J. Math. Pures Appl. 101 (2014), 275-302.
[23] X. Ros-Oton, J. Serra, The Pohozaev identity for the fractional Laplacian, Arch. Rat. Mech.
Anal. 213 (2014), 587-628.
[24] X. Ros-Oton, J. Serra, The extremal solution for the fractional Laplacian, Calc. Var, 50 (2014)
723-750.
[25] X. Ros-Oton, J. Serra, Boundary regularity for fully nonlinear integro-differential equations,
preprint arXiv (Apr. 2014).
[26] X. Ros-Oton, J. Serra, Regularity theory for general stable operators, forthcoming.
[27] G. Samorodnitsky, M. S. Taqqu, Stable Non-Gaussian Random Processes: Stochastic Models
With Infinite Variance, Chapman and Hall, New York, 1994.
[28] J. Serra, Regularity for fully nonlinear nonlocal parabolic equations with rough kernels, preprint
arXiv (Jan. 2014).
Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya, Facultat de Matema`tiques i Estad´ıstica,
Pau Gargallo 5, 08028 Barcelona, Spain
E-mail address: xavier.fernandez-real@estudiant.upc.edu
University of Texas at Austin, Department of Mathematics, 2515 Speedway, TX
78712 Austin, USA
E-mail address: ros.oton@math.utexas.edu