Jointly Discriminative and Generative Recurrent
Neural Networks for Learning from fMRI
Nicha C. Dvornek1,2, Xiaoxiao Li2, Juntang Zhuang2, James S. Duncan1,2,3,4
1Department of Radiology & Biomedical Imaging, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, USA
9102 tcO 51  ]VI.ssee[  1v05960.0191:viXra 2Department of Biomedical Engineering, 3Department of Electrical Engineering, and
4Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA
Abstract. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) were designed for dealing
with time-series data and have recently been used for creating predic-
tive models from functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) data.
However, gathering large fMRI datasets for learning is a difficult task.
Furthermore, network interpretability is unclear. To address these issues,
we utilize multitask learning and design a novel RNN-based model that
learns to discriminate between classes while simultaneously learning to
generate the fMRI time-series data. Employing the long short-term mem-
ory (LSTM) structure, we develop a discriminative model based on the
hidden state and a generative model based on the cell state. The addition
of the generative model constrains the network to learn functional com-
munities represented by the LSTM nodes that are both consistent with
the data generation as well as useful for the classification task. We apply
our approach to the classification of subjects with autism vs. healthy
controls using several datasets from the Autism Brain Imaging Data Ex-
change. Experiments show that our jointly discriminative and generative
model improves classification learning while also producing robust and
meaningful functional communities for better model understanding.
1 Introduction
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has become an important tool
for investigating neurological disorders and diseases. In addition, machine learn-
ing has begun to play a large role, in which classification models are learned
and interpreted to discover potential fMRI biomarkers for disease. Traditional
approaches for building classification models from resting-state fMRI first par-
cellate the brain into a number of regions of interest (ROIs) and use functional
connectivity between the ROIs as inputs to a classification algorithm [1]. Re-
cently with the advent of deep learning, temporal inputs based on the time-series
data combined with recurrent neural network (RNN) models have been explored
for predicting from fMRI [7,8,14]. Such RNN models are attractive for processing
fMRI as they were designed for dealing with sequential data. However, the large
sample sizes required for effective deep learning are difficult to gather for fMRI
data, particularly for many different patient populations or types of studies.

One way to handle the limited data problem is to apply multitask learning
[4]. The idea in multitask learning is that shared information across related tasks
is jointly learned in order to improve the learning of each individual task. For
a classification task based on fMRI data, e.g., distinguish subjects with a given
disease from healthy individuals, the amount of labeled data is often limited.
Thus, we propose to apply multitask learning to improve the learning of a target
discriminative task by jointly learning an auxiliary generative model for the fMRI
data, which does not require any annotation. Moreover, simultaneous learning
of the generative model will assist in interpreting the discriminative model.
Specifically, we propose to jointly learn a discriminative task while also learn-
ing to generate the input fMRI time-series by using an RNN with long short-term
memory (LSTM). Generative RNN models have been extensively used in natural
language processing, e.g., for text generation [9], but application to the medical
imaging field has been limited. Furthermore, multitask learning with discrimi-
native and generative components have been combined in many different neural
network architectures, notably generative adversarial networks, but such a joint
learning approach utilizing the RNN framework has only begun to be explored
and under the context of adversarial training for a target generative task [2].
In this paper, we design a novel RNN-based model with LSTM to simultane-
ously learn a discriminative and generative task by utilizing the state information
in a shared LSTM layer. Using fMRI ROI time-series as inputs, we interpret the
LSTM block as modeling the coordination of functional activity in the brain and
the nodes of the LSTM as representing functional communities, i.e., groupings
of the input brain ROIs that work together to both generate the fMRI time-
series and perform the discriminative task. We apply the proposed network for
classification of ASD vs. healthy controls, validating on multiple datasets from
the Autism Brain Imaging Data Exchange (ABIDE) I dataset. Compared to
several recent methods, we achieve some of the highest accuracy reported on
single-site ABIDE data. Finally, we evaluate the generative results by analyzing
the robustness of the extracted functional communities and validate influential
communities for classification in the context of ASD.
2 Methods
2.1 Network Architecture
LSTM Block for Communities The LSTM module was designed to learn
long-term dependencies in sequential data [10]. An LSTM cell is composed of 4
neural network layers with K nodes that modulate two state vectors, the hidden
state h ∈ RK and the cell state c ∈ RK. The state vectors are updated using
t t
input from the current time point x ∈ RR and state information from the
t
previous time point h and c :
t−1 t−1
g = σ (W x + U h + b ),with g ∈ {i,f,o} (1)
t g t g t−1 g
c˜ = tanh(W x + U h + b ) (2)
t c t c t−1 c
c = i ∗ c˜ + f ∗ c , h = o ∗ tanh(c ) (3)
t t t t t−1 t t t

where for layer l ∈ {i,f,o,c}, W are the weights for the input, U are the weights
l l
for the hidden state, and b are the bias parameters.
l
The proposed network first takes the fMRI ROI time-series as inputs to an
LSTM layer (Fig. 1, blue path). The purpose of this layer is to discover mean-
ingful groupings of the ROIs, i.e. functional communities, that are important for
both generating and classifying the input data. The LSTM block acts as a model
for the interaction between R individual ROIs and K functional communities
formed by the brain network to generate community activity. The activity gen-
erated by each functional community k is then represented by the hidden state
h (k) and cell state c (k), which will serve as inputs to the rest of the network.
t t
Standard community detection methods for fMRI perform clustering based
on functional connectivity, where highly positively correlated ROIs are grouped
into a community. In our approach, we propose defining a functional community
by the interactions modeled in the LSTM and the generated ROI data (see Sec.
2.2). To ensure that ROIs within a community have positive ties as in standard
approaches, we constrain the input weights W to be non-negative.
l
Discriminative Path The discriminative portion of the network aims to clas-
sify subjects with ASD vs. typical controls (Fig. 1, orange path). The architecture
is similar to the classification network proposed in [7]. The difference is our ap-
proach first processes the input time-series through an LSTM layer that learns
to represent functional communities of the ROI data. The hidden state of the
LSTM cell at each time point is then fed to another LSTM layer, followed by
a shared dense layer with a single node, a mean pooling layer, and a sigmoid
activation to give the probability of ASD.
Generative Path The generative portion of the network looks to generate the
data at the next time point x of an input time-series with length T (Fig. 1,
T+1
green path). The input is first processed by the same LSTM layer for functional
communites as in the discriminative network. The final cell state c of the LSTM
T
cell is then passed to a dense layer with R nodes to produce the predicted ROI
values for the next time point x(cid:91) = W c + b . To enforce that communities
T+1 d T d
exert a positive influence on their members, we constrain the weights for this
dense layer to be non-negative.
Model Training The discriminative and generative paths are tied together dur-
(cid:0) (cid:1)
ing training with the loss function L = L x ,x(cid:91) +λL (y,yˆ), where L
G T+1 T+1 D G
is the loss for the generative model, L is the loss for the discriminative model,
D
y ∈ {0,1} is the true label (1 denoting ASD), yˆ is the predicted probability of
ASD, and λ is a hyperparameter to balance the two losses. For regularization, we
include dropout layers before the shared dense layer and mean pooling layer in
the discriminative network and before the dense layer in the generative network.

Classification
Mean Pooling Sigmoid
Probability (cid:1877)(cid:3548)
...
LSTM LSTM LSTM
Cell Cell Cell
h h h
1 t T
LSTM LSTM ... LSTM c T ... Generated 
Cell Cell Cell Data (cid:1876)(cid:3551)
(cid:3021)(cid:2878)(cid:2869)
x x x
1 t T
W
d
fMRI ROI  R ROIs
Time-series
K Communities
Fig.1: Architecture of our jointly discriminative and generative RNN: LSTM for func-
tional communities (blue), discriminative path (orange), and generative path (green).
2.2 Extraction of Functional Communities
As described above, we propose interpreting each node of the first LSTM block as
representing a functional community, where community activity is summarized
by state vectors h and c . Since it is difficult to analyze the interactions between
t t
ROIs and communities via all the layers of the LSTM block, we propose defining
the communities based on their influence on each individual ROI. Recall that
the generative path uses the cell state c as input to a dense layer to generate
T
the next ROI values x(cid:91) = W c + b . From a graph structure perspective, a
T+1 d T d
community is defined by densely connected nodes, i.e. each member of a com-
munity is strongly influenced by that community, but also the community is
strongly influenced by its members. Thus, we will use the weights W ∈ RR×K
d
to denote the membership between individual ROIs and their functional com-
munities. Row r of W represents the influence of each community on ROI r,
d
while column k of W represents the influence of each ROI on community k. To
d
provide hard membership assignments, we perform k-means clustering with 2
clusters on the membership weights in column k of W and assign the extracted
d
ROIs in the cluster with larger weights to community k (Fig. 1, lower right).
3 Experiments
3.1 Data
We used resting-state fMRI data from the four ABIDE I [6] sites with the largest
sample sizes: New York University (NY), University of Michigan (UM), Univer-
sity of Utah School of Medicine (US), and University of California, Los An-
geles (UC). We selected preprocessed data from the Preprocessed Connectomes
Project [5] using the Connectome Computation System pipeline, global signal re-
gression and band-pass filtering, and the Automated Anatomical Labeling (AAL)
parcellation with 116 ROIs. The extracted mean time-series of each ROI was
standardized (subtracted mean, divided by standard deviation) for each subject.

Since the number of subjects per site is small for neural network training,
we augmented the datasets by extracting all possible consecutive subsequences
with length T = 30 (i.e., 1 min. scantime) from each subject, producing inputs
of size 30×116. Thus, we augmented the data by a factor of ~150-250 for a total
of ~14000-38000 samples per site. At test time, the predicted probability of ASD
for a given subject was set to the proportion of subsequences labeled as ASD.
3.2 Experimental Methods
Models for classification of ASD vs. control were trained for each individual
ABIDE site. We implemented the following LSTM-based networks which all take
the ROI time-series data as input: the proposed joint discriminative/generative
LSTM network (LSTM-DG); the same network but using the hidden state for
both data generation and class discrimination (LSTM-H); the same network but
with no generative constraint, i.e. only the discriminative loss (LSTM-D); and a
single layer discriminative LSTM network as proposed in [7] (LSTM-S). Models
were implemented in Keras, with 50 nodes for the first LSTM (for functional
communities) and 20 nodes for the second LSTM. Optimization was performed
using the Adam optimizer, with binary cross-entropy for L , mean squared
D
error for L , a batch size of 32, and early stopping based on validation loss
G
and a patience of 10 epochs. For joint discriminative/generative networks, we
set λ = 0.1 so that L and L are on similar scales. We also implemented
G D
a traditional learning pipeline for resting-state fMRI (FC-SVM) [1]: the func-
tional connectivity based on Pearson correlation was input to a linear support
vector machine with L2 regularization, using nested cross-validation to choose
the penalty hyperparameter. All implemented models were trained and tested
on the augmented datasets. In addition, we compared published results for the
same ABIDE datasets and AAL atlas, including another time-series modeling
approach using hidden markov models (HMM) [11] and another neural network
approach based on stacked autoencoders and deep transfer learning (DTL) [13].
To assess our implemented models, we used 10-fold cross-validation (CV),
keeping all data from the same subject within the same partition (training,
validation, or test). We measured model classification performance by computing
the accuracy (ACC), true positive rate (TPR), true negative rate (TNR), and
area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC). Paired one-tailed
t-tests were used to compare model performance over all folds and datasets.
For the generative results, with no ground truth for functional communities,
we instead evaluated the robustness of extracted communities and compared a
tensor decomposition approach for finding overlapping communities. For each
sample, we calculated the correlation matrix of the R ROI time-series, then
generated a tensor T with dimension R×R×S, where S is the number of samples.
PK
We then used non-negative PARAFAC [3] to decompose T ≈ a ◦ b ◦ c ,
k=1 k k k
where K is the number of communities, a = b ∈ RR contains the membership
k k
weight of each ROI to community k, c ∈ RS contains the membership weight of
k
each sample to community k, and ◦ is the vector outer product. Similar to our
approach, we set K = 50 communities and use k-means clustering to assign hard

ROI memberships to each community. Then for each approach, we computed
the correlation of the membership weights and the Dice similarity coefficient
(DSC) of hard membership assigments between community k in fold 1 and all
communities in fold f 6= 1. The robustness of community k in fold 1 compared
to fold f was measured as the maximum correlation/DSC computed in fold f.
We then assessed overall community robustness between fold 1 and f using the
average correlation/DSC over all communities.
We also performed validation of the functional communities in the context of
the ASD classification task using Neurosynth [15], which correlates over 14000
fMRI studies with 1300 descriptors. The influence of a community for classifica-
tion was denoted by the sum of absolute weights across all nodes in the second
LSTM block for the discriminative task. A binary mask of the extracted ROIs
for an important discriminative community was then input to Neurosynth to
assess neurocognitive processes associated with ASD classification.
3.3 Classification Results
Classification results for each ABIDE site are in Tables 1 and 2. Our LSTM-DG
model produced the highest accuracy for 3 of the 4 sites and second highest for
US, in which the LSTM-H variation of our model (generative path from hidden
state) performed best. Furthermore, LSTM-DG produced the highest or nearly
highest AUC for each site. Overall, our LSTM-DG consistently outperformed all
non-generative implemented models (ACC p < 0.05) and showed potential for
improved classification compared to LSTM-H (ACC p = 0.08). Moreover, LSTM-
DG was the only method to significantly outperform LSTM-S (ACC p = 0.04,
TNR p = 0.04), the original LSTM model for fMRI classification. The results
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed LSTM-DG method to improve
classification by jointly learning the generative fMRI time-series model.
3.4 Learned Functional Communities
Results for extracted communities by tensor-based community detection (CD,
blue) and the proposed LSTM approach (orange) are plotted in Fig. 2. Our
LSTM method produced consistently smaller communities with more uniform
Table 1: NY and UM Classification Results
NY (184 subjects, 42.3% ASD) UM (143 subjects, 46.2% ASD)
Model Mean (Std) Mean (Std) Mean (Std) Mean (Std) Mean (Std) Mean (Std)
AUC AUC
ACC (%) TPR (%) TNR (%) ACC (%) TPR (%) TNR (%)
LSTM-S [7] 69.5 (11.0) 52.4 (26.5) 83.1 (12.0) 0.720 69.8 (11.4) 56.7 (24.2) 74.0 (25.3) 0.740
FC-SVM [1] 70.7 (8.2) 54.8 (21.5) 83.2 (11.8) 0.783 69.2 (12.0) 46.7 (18.9) 89.8 (12.8) 0.713
HMM [11] 70.6 (6.6) 61.6 66.7 0.712 73.4 (10.5) 68.5 76.9 0.738
DTL [13] - - - - 67.2 68.9 67.6 0.67
LSTM-D 70.7 (11.0) 48.9 (27.1) 86.7 (16.1) 0.746 67.0 (12.0) 52.9 (22.2) 78.6 (25.6) 0.738
LSTM-H 68.0 (7.7) 52.0 (19.8) 80.1 (10.1) 0.779 69.2 (11.4) 57.9 (14.5) 78.7 (18.1) 0.777
LSTM-DG 72.2 (14.7) 57.4 (25.5) 84.1 (12.2) 0.772 74.8 (10.0) 60.8 (12.8) 85.6 (14.5) 0.774

| Model     | NY(184subjects,42.3%ASD)   | None       | None       | None   | UM(143subjects,46.2%ASD)   | None       | None       | None   |
|:----------|:---------------------------|:-----------|:-----------|:-------|:---------------------------|:-----------|:-----------|:-------|
|           | Mean(Std)                  | Mean(Std)  | Mean(Std)  | AUC    | Mean(Std)                  | Mean(Std)  | Mean(Std)  | AUC    |
|           | ACC(%)                     | TPR(%)     | TNR(%)     |        | ACC(%)                     | TPR(%)     | TNR(%)     |        |
| LSTM-S[7] | 69.5(11.0)                 | 52.4(26.5) | 83.1(12.0) | 0.720  | 69.8(11.4)                 | 56.7(24.2) | 74.0(25.3) | 0.740  |
| FC-SVM[1] | 70.7 (8.2)                 | 54.8(21.5) | 83.2(11.8) | 0.783  | 69.2(12.0)                 | 46.7(18.9) | 89.8(12.8) | 0.713  |
| HMM[11]   | 70.6 (6.6)                 | 61.6       | 66.7       | 0.712  | 73.4(10.5)                 | 68.5       | 76.9       | 0.738  |
| DTL[13]   | -                          | -          | -          | -      | 67.2                       | 68.9       | 67.6       | 0.67   |
| LSTM-D    | 70.7(11.0)                 | 48.9(27.1) | 86.7(16.1) | 0.746  | 67.0(12.0)                 | 52.9(22.2) | 78.6(25.6) | 0.738  |
| LSTM-H    | 68.0 (7.7)                 | 52.0(19.8) | 80.1(10.1) | 0.779  | 69.2(11.4)                 | 57.9(14.5) | 78.7(18.1) | 0.777  |
| LSTM-DG   | 72.2(14.7)                 | 57.4(25.5) | 84.1(12.2) | 0.772  | 74.8(10.0)                 | 60.8(12.8) | 85.6(14.5) | 0.774  |

Table 2: US and UC Classification Results
US (101 subjects, 57.4% ASD) UC (99 subjects, 54.6% ASD)
Model Mean (Std) Mean (Std) Mean (Std) Mean (Std) Mean (Std) Mean (Std)
AUC AUC
ACC (%) TPR (%) TNR (%) ACC (%) TPR (%) TNR (%)
LSTM-S [7] 67.5 (15.4) 79.8 (25.3) 56.2 (41.8) 0.659 62.7 (14.8) 74.4 (31.5) 51.5 (32.5) 0.691
FC-SVM [1] 67.3 (13.5) 86.2 (13.6) 43.5 (27.6) 0.721 61.7 (18.0) 73.3 (20.6) 47.7 (31.7) 0.624
DTL [13] 70.4 72.5 67.0 0.73 62.3 55.9 68.0 0.60
LSTM-D 64.7 (17.8) 75.3 (32.2) 61.8 (39.6) 0.682 63.6 (8.8) 71.8 (27.3) 51.3 (30.5) 0.662
LSTM-H 76.4 (13.9) 85.6 (18.0) 65.8 (22.2) 0.757 61.6 (11.4) 66.6 (14.5) 54.7 (18.1) 0.705
LSTM-DG 73.2 (14.7) 82.8 (25.5) 61.8 (12.2) 0.746 67.4 (10.0) 67.5 (12.8) 62.2 (14.5) 0.715
size compared to CD, with an average of 11 ROIs compared to 16. Furthermore,
our LSTM approach consistently generated communities with higher correlation
of membership weights and higher DSC of hard community assignments across
CV folds for all sites, with a 15% increase in average correlation and 11% increase
in average DSC. Thus, our proposed network produced smaller and more robust
functional communities than CD, giving our model the potential for more reliable
interpretation of further analyses on the functional communities.
The top 3 influential communities for the ASD classification of the largest
dataset (NY) were extracted from the best CV fold and analyzed in Neurosynth.
ASD is characterized by impaired social skills and communiciation; thus, we ex-
pect to find communities related to associated neurological functions. The top
extracted community (Fig. 3, yellow) includes the temporal lobe and ventrome-
dial prefrontal cortex, which are associated with social and language processes.
The second community (Fig. 3, green) includes the ventromedial prefrontal cor-
tex, hippocampus, and amygdala, which are associated with memory. The third
community (Fig. 3, pink), containing the ventromedial prefrontal cortex and ven-
tral striatum, is involved in reward processing and decision making. Dysfunction
of all these brain regions and processes in ASD have previously been shown [12].
4 Conclusions
We have presented a novel RNN-based network for jointly learning a discrimina-
tive task and a generative model for fMRI time-series data. We achieved higher
ASD classification performance on several datasets, demonstrating the advantage
Community Size Correlation DSC
CD LSTM CD LSTM CD LSTM
25 0.8 0.8
20 0.75
0.7
15
0.7
10
0.6
5 0.65
0 0.5 0.6
NY UM US UC NY UM US UC NY UM US UC
Fig.2: Size (left) and robustness of extracted functional communities across CV folds
measured by correlation of membership weights (middle) and DSC of hard assignments
(right). CD = tensor-based community detection, LSTM = proposed network.

| Model     | US(101subjects,57.4%ASD)   | None       | None       | None   | UC(99subjects,54.6%ASD)   | None       | None       | None   |
|:----------|:---------------------------|:-----------|:-----------|:-------|:--------------------------|:-----------|:-----------|:-------|
|           | Mean(Std)                  | Mean(Std)  | Mean(Std)  | AUC    | Mean(Std)                 | Mean(Std)  | Mean(Std)  | AUC    |
|           | ACC(%)                     | TPR(%)     | TNR(%)     |        | ACC(%)                    | TPR(%)     | TNR(%)     |        |
| LSTM-S[7] | 67.5(15.4)                 | 79.8(25.3) | 56.2(41.8) | 0.659  | 62.7(14.8)                | 74.4(31.5) | 51.5(32.5) | 0.691  |
| FC-SVM[1] | 67.3(13.5)                 | 86.2(13.6) | 43.5(27.6) | 0.721  | 61.7(18.0)                | 73.3(20.6) | 47.7(31.7) | 0.624  |
| DTL[13]   | 70.4                       | 72.5       | 67.0       | 0.73   | 62.3                      | 55.9       | 68.0       | 0.60   |
| LSTM-D    | 64.7(17.8)                 | 75.3(32.2) | 61.8(39.6) | 0.682  | 63.6 (8.8)                | 71.8(27.3) | 51.3(30.5) | 0.662  |
| LSTM-H    | 76.4(13.9)                 | 85.6(18.0) | 65.8(22.2) | 0.757  | 61.6(11.4)                | 66.6(14.5) | 54.7(18.1) | 0.705  |
| LSTM-DG   | 73.2(14.7)                 | 82.8(25.5) | 61.8(12.2) | 0.746  | 67.4(10.0)                | 67.5(12.8) | 62.2(14.5) | 0.715  |

| Weh      | avepresentedanovelRNN          | -basednetworkf     | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | orjointlylearningadiscri     | mina-   |
| tive t   | ask and a generative mode      | l for fMRI time-   |        |        |        |        |        | series data. We achieved h   | igher   |
| ASD      | classificationperformance      | onseveraldatase    |        |        |        |        |        | ts,demonstratingtheadva      | ntage   |
| 25       | Community Size                 | Correlation        |        |        |        |        |        | DSC                          | LSTM    |
| 20       | CD LSTM                        | CD                 |        |        |        |        |        | LSTM CD                      | UC      |
| 15       | 0.8                            |                    |        |        |        |        |        | 0.8                          | folds   |
| 10       | 0.7                            |                    |        |        |        |        |        | 0.75                         | ments   |
| 5        | 0.6                            |                    |        |        |        |        |        | 0.7                          |         |
| 0        | 0.5                            |                    |        |        |        |        |        | 0.65                         |         |
| N        | Y UM US UC                     |                    |        |        |        |        |        | 0.6                          |         |
| Fig.2:   | Size (left) and robustness o   |                    |        |        |        |        |        | UC NY UM US                  |         |
| measu    | redbycorrelationofmembe        |                    |        |        |        |        |        | onal communities across CV   |         |
| (right   | ). CD = tensor-based comm      |                    |        |        |        |        |        | dle)andDSCofhardassign       |         |
|          |                                |                    |        |        |        |        |        | STM = proposed network.      |         |
|:---------|:-------------------------------|:-------------------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-----------------------------|:--------|
|          |                                | NY UM US           |        |        |        |        |        |                              |         |
|          |                                | f extracted functi |        |        |        |        |        |                              |         |
|          |                                | rshipweights(mid   |        |        |        |        |        |                              |         |
|          |                                | unity detection, L |        |        |        |        |        |                              |         |

| 0   | 1   | 2   |
|:----|:----|:----|
|     |     |     |

| 0   | 1   | 2   | 3   | 4   |
|:----|:----|:----|:----|:----|
|     |     |     |     |     |

Fig.3: Top 3 influential communities for ASD classification of the NY dataset and the
top associated neurocognitive terms from Neurosynth.
of joint learning. Finally, we showed that functional communities defined by the
LSTM nodes provide robust representations of brain activity and facilitate in-
terpretation of the ASD classification model. Understanding functional network
organization will offer insights into brain disease as well as healthy cognition.
References
1. Abraham, A., Milham, M.P., Martino, A.D., Craddock, R.C., Samaras, D., Thirion,
B., Varoquaux, G.: Deriving reproducible biomarkers from multi-site resting-state
data: An autism-based example. Neuroimage 147, 736–745 (2017)
2. Adate, A., Tripathy, B.: S-lstm-gan: Shared recurrent neural networks with adver-
sarial training. In: 2nd International Conference on Data Engineering and Com-
munication Technology (2019)
3. Carroll, J., Chang, J.: Analysis of individual differences in multidimensionalscaling
via an n-way generalization of eckart-young decomposition. Psychometrika (1970)
4. Caruana, R.: Multitask learning. Machine Learning (1997)
5. Craddock, C., Benhajali, Y., Chu, C., Chouinard, F., Evans, A., Jakab, A., ...,
Bellec, P.: The neuro bureau preprocessing initiative: open sharing of preprocessed
neuroimaging data and derivatives. In: Neuroinformatics (2013)
6. Di Martino, A., Yan, C.G., Li, Q., Denio, E., Castellanos, F.X., Alaerts, K., ...,
Milham, M.P.: The autism brain imaging data exchange: towards a large-scale eval-
uation of the intrinsic brain architecture in autism. Molecular Psychiatry (2014)
7. Dvornek, N.C., Ventola, P., Pelphrey, K.A., Duncan, J.S.: Identifying autism from
resting-state fmri using long short-term memory networks. In: MLMI 2017. LNCS
10541 (2017)
8. Güçlü, U., van Gerven, M.A.J.: Modeling the dynamics of human brain activity
with recurrent neural networks. Front Comput Neurosci (2017)
9. Graves, A.: Generating sequences with recurrent neural networks.
https://arxiv.org/abs/1308.0850 (2014)
10. Hochreiter, S., Schmidhuber, J.: Long short-term memory. Neural Computation
(1997)
11. Jun, E., Kang, E., Choi, J., Suk, H.I.: Modeling regional dynamics in low-frequency
fluctuation and its application to autism spectrum disorder diagnosis. NeuroImage
(2019)
12. Kaiser, M., Hudac, C., Shultz, S., Lee, S., Cheung, C., Berken, A., ..., Pelphrey,
K.: Neural signatures of autism. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)

13. Li, H., Parikh, N.A., He, L.: A novel transfer learning approach to enhance deep
neural network classification of brain functional connectomes. Front. Neurosci.
(2018)
14. Li, H., Fan, Y.: Brain decoding from functional mri using long short-term memory
recurrent neural networks. MICCAI 2018 (2018)
15. Yarkoni, T., Poldrack, R.A., Nichols, T.E., Van Essen, D.C., Wager, T.D.: Large-
scale automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data. Nature Methods
(2011), www.neurosynth.org