Thoughts About a Conceptual Framework for
∗
Relativistic Gravity
2102 raM 41  ]hp-tsih.scisyhp[  1v0903.3021:viXra Bernard F Schutz
Max Planck Institute for Gravitational Physics
(Albert Einstein Institute), 14476 Potsdam/Golm, Germany,
and
Department of Physics and Astronomy,
Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, UK.
Bernard.Schutz@aei.mpg.de
Abstract
I consider the isolation of general relativity research from the rest of
theoretical physics during the 1930s-1950s, and the subsequent reinvigora-
tion of the field. I suggest that the main reason for the isolation was that
relativists of the time did not develop heuristic concepts about the physics
of the theory with which they could communicate with other physicists,
and that the revival happened when they began to develop such concepts.
A powerful heuristic today is the concept of a black hole, which is a ro-
bust and stable component of many astronomical systems. During the
1930s relativists could only offer the “Schwarzschild singularity”. I argue
that the change occurred at least partly because key theoretical physi-
cists schooled in quantum theory entered relativity research and began to
approach problematic issues by asking questions about observable effects
and the outcomes of thought experiments. The result was the develop-
ment of a physical intuition about such things as black holes, which could
then be communicated to non-specialists. Only then was it possible to
integrate general relativity fully into the rest of physics.
1. Introduction
Mine is one of several talks at this meeting that consider the revival of
relativity and its integration into the mainstream of physics, beginning
in the 1950s. Ted Newman has described the physics problems that cre-
ated confusion during the slow period 1930–1950, and how eventually a
new generation of young physicists pulled the theory out of its mire. Sil-
vio Bergia has emphasized the changes of thinking that were required,
and the importance of the physical insight and especially the geometrical
perspective that John Wheeler, among others, brought to the subject. I
want to focus on the gulf that opened up during the slow period between
∗
To be published, without the abstract and with small editorial changes, in Einstein and
the Changing Worldviews of Physics (Einstein Studies, vol. 12). ed C Lehner, J Renn, M
Schemmel. Boston: Birkh¨auser (2011). Based on a talk delivered at the Seventh International
Conference on the History of General Relativity, Tenerife, Canary Islands, March 2005.
1

relativists and the rest of what I will call mainstream theoretical physics.
This gulf is important not just for the negative influence it exerted on
the development of relativity. It also has much to teach us about what
physicists expect from a theory of physics, and especially about the role
of heuristic concepts in physicists’ communication with one another.
My thesis is that general relativity, despite its essential mathematical
completeness in 1916, did not become a complete theory of physics until
the 1970s. In order to understand this period, scholars of relativity need
to look, not just at progress in understanding the mathematical theory,
but at the slow development of heuristic concepts that were needed to
enable relativists to talk to other physicists in a common language.
Today we have a fairly secure set of heuristic concepts: for example, we
know what a black hole is, we know what gravitational waves do, we know
how gravitational lenses work. These concepts – black holes, gravitational
waves, gravitational lenses – have gained a kind of concrete physical re-
ality, even though if you take them apart they are just ideas that rest
ultimately on rather complex (and usually approximate) solutions of Ein-
stein’s field equations. Very importantly, they are concepts that relativists
can communicate to nonrelativists who may need them (astronomers, ex-
perimental physicists, historians, the general public) without needing to
pass on all their mathematical underpinnings.
The key accomplishment of the generation of physicists who revived
relativity is that they created a wide range of useful concepts like these
out of the confusions that plagued the previous generation. This took a
huge amount of work, but the work was not done at random. Rather, a
handful of creative and senior physicists, many of whom came to relativity
from other branches of physics, very deliberately shaped the directions of
research toward developing these paradigmatic concepts, thereby adding
the physics to the mathematical skeleton of the theory. In my view, the
absence of such a vision of how to make relativity into a working theory
of physics was what, in the dark period, led to the increasing isolation of
relativity from the mainstream.
2. The Gulf of Relativity
The gulf between mainstream physics and relativity between 1930 and
1960 is remarkable for how huge it was (Eisenstaedt 1989, 2006). Rarely
has an important sub-field of physics enjoyed such a poor reputation. Very
few physicists moved back and forth across the gulf or even made an effort
to communicate across the divide.
Equally remarkable has been the subsequent huge turn-around. Grav-
itational physics is mainstream physics today. Massive amounts of money
fund gravitational wave experiments; the holy grail of theoretical particle
physics is to unify the nuclear and electromagnetic forces with gravity; a
course in general relativity is standard for physics graduate students. A
few short anecdotes serve to illustrate the depths to which relativity sank
and the heights to which it has subsequently risen.
Anecdote 1. The Nobel-Prize-winning astrophysicist Subrahmanyan
Chandrasekhar kept a remarkable scientific diary, in which at the end of
each year he summarized his scientific work and decisions of that year.
Shortly after Chandra’s death in 1995, Norman Lebovitz (private com-
munication) showed me some of the entries. Very interestingly, Chandra
writes that, during the 1930s, he considered starting to do research in
relativity, in order to explore what would happen to a compact star that
2

exceeded the maximum white-dwarf mass that Chandra himself had re-
cently established. He consulted other physicists, who strongly advised
him against doing this. General relativity, one told him, had proved to
be a “graveyard of many theoretical astronomers”. Chandra particularly
mentions that Niels Bohr discouraged him from making a move into rela-
tivity. (Considering Bohr’s exchanges with Einstein on the interpretation
of quantum mechanics, this is a tantalizing remark!) Chandra’s reputation
and career were by no means secure in the 1930s, and so he looked (very
productively) elsewhere for research problems. It was not until after 1960
that he felt confident enough of his reputation that he finally indulged his
long-postponed wish to work on general relativity. [Kip Thorne, one of
the dominant figures in modern relativity research, reports (Thorne 1994)
that he had similarly negative advice when he was contemplating doing
graduate work in relativity in the early 1960s.]
Anecdote 2. It is worth looking here at Richard Feynman’s famous
reaction (in a letter to his wife) to the 1962 Warsaw relativity meeting
(Feynman 1988):
I am not getting anything out of the meeting. I am learning
nothing. Because there are no experiments this field is not an
active one, so few of the best men are doing work in it. The
result is that there are hosts of dopes here and it is not good
for my blood pressure: such inane things are said and seriously
discussed that I get into arguments outside the formal sessions
(say, at lunch) whenever anyone asks me a question or starts to
tell me about his “work.” The “work” is always: (1) completely
un-understandable, (2) vague and indefinite, (3) something cor-
rect that is obvious and self-evident, but worked out by a long
and difficult analysis, and presented as an important discovery,
or (4) a claim based on the stupidity of the author that some
obvious and correct fact, accepted and checked for years, is, in
fact, false (these are the worst: no argument will convince the
idiot), (5) an attempt to do something probably impossible,
but certainly of no utility, which, it is finally revealed at the
end, fails, or (6) just plain wrong. There is a great deal of “ac-
tivity in the field” these days, but this “activity” is mainly in
showing that the previous “activity” of somebody else resulted
in an error or in nothing useful or in something promising. It
is like a lot of worms trying to get out of a bottle by crawling
all over each other. It is not that the subject is hard; it is that
the good men are occupied elsewhere. Remind me not to come
to any more gravity conferences!
This is, of course, typical Feynman hyperbole. We know that at that
meeting (Infeld 1964) a core group of relativists was already coming to
grips with issues like energy, black holes, and the reality of gravitational
waves. And ironically it took place just a year before the first Texas
Symposium in Relativistic Astrophysics (Robinson, et al, 1965), which is
often regarded as the moment that relativity began to have real interest to
astrophysicists. Nevertheless Feynman’s remarks show why it would still
be another couple of decades before mainstream theoretical physics would
completely drop its prejudices against the relativity community. The two
sides were not communicating.
Anecdote 3. I vividly remember my own personal experiences as a
young relativist. In the 1970s if I mentioned black holes to an astronomer,
3

the best I could usually hope for was a patronizing smile. And this was
after the discovery of what we now know was the first black hole in a
binary system, Cyg X-1, by the Uhuru satellite (which led to the award
of the 2002 Nobel Prize to Riccardo Giacconi). Later, during the 1980s,
when I moved into gravitational wave detection, many astronomers told
me I was throwing my career away. And they were the sympathetic ones;
others just saw me as a misguided threat to their own research funding!
Anecdote 4. If the low point of relativity was very low, the current
high point is indeed very high. Nothing illustrates the dramatic nature of
this turn-around better than money. By 2020 at least 3-4 billion dollars
will have been invested by a dozen national and international scientific
organizations in building gravitational wave detectors on the ground and
in space. Most of this money has already been committed, at least in
a planning sense, and this has all happened even before the first direct
detection of a gravitational wave!
Where has today’s immense faith in general relativity come from?
How did relativity establish such strong credentials after being in such
disrepute? It seems to me that to answer this question we need to do
more than simply catalog the details of what happened in relativity and
astrophysics to get us where we are today. We have to understand how
physicists judge the credibility of other physicists. The tortured devel-
opment of gravitational physics is a good case study of how physicists
decide that other people are really doing physics, even though they may
not understand the mathematical and technical details.
3. Heuristics in General Relativity
I won’t attempt to give anything like a complete set of answers to the
questions I have just posed, but I think a key to answering them lies in
the fact that physicists have a characteristic way of thinking, which they
call physical intuition. Physicists think in terms of models, of heuristic
concepts that they connect up using this physical intuition. Physicists’
models must of course be founded on the mathematical expression of a
theory, but physicists are typically not happy if all they have are math-
ematical links between their models. They want concepts that enable
them to understand essential parts of theories, even if they have not de-
veloped a facility with the mathematics of those theories. They need to
have models they can exchange with physicists in other specialties, which
allow those physicists to work with the concepts without being expert in
their underlying theory.
I will illustrate the conceptual changes in relativity between the “dark
ages” and the modern era by considering two key issues that were also
listed by Ted Newman in his talk as keyproblems that were not solved dur-
ing the darkyears of relativity. The firstis the meaning of theSchwarzschild
solution. In the 1930s people talked about the “Schwarzschild singularity”
(by which they meant the horizon, not the crunch at the center). Today
we use the term “black hole”. There is a world of difference between
the ideas behind these different terminologies. If you think you have a
singularity then you can’t use it in a physical model. You don’t know
how to include such an object in a physical system, either as the outcome
of gravitational collapse or as an object that might affect other objects
with its gravitational field. On the other hand, the term “black hole” is
a shorthand description of a real object, one which you can confidently
include in models for some physical systems: as the constituent of a model
for an X-ray binary system, for example, or as a gravitating center in the
4

middle of a galaxy. In the first case you are paralyzed by incomprehen-
sion. In the second you can hide away all the nonlinear general relativity,
if you wish, and treat the object as just another member of the vast zoo
of objects that makes up our fascinating universe.
My second example is gravitational radiation. In the low period, peo-
ple worried about the reality of the radiation itself. Doubting that waves
could remove energy from sources and/or deposit it in detectors, rela-
tivists were unable to draw the clear parallels with electromagnetic radia-
tion that would have emphasized the natural place that general relativity
has in theoretical physics. By resolving these issues, relativists were fi-
nally in the position by 1980 to take advantage of the discovery of the
Hulse-Taylor binary pulsar to show that observations supported the dy-
namical sector of Einstein’s theory. Not all the mathematical problems
associated with gravitational waves are yet solved even today, but the
field has enough confidence in its approximation methods and its control
over the remaining outstanding issues that it has been able to develop a
thoroughly convincing physical picture of gravitational waves.
4. Why Did the Gulf Drift Open?
So why did relativists find themselves excluded from the rest of theoretical
physics in the 1930s to 1950s? Apart from a few notable exceptions, such
as J. Robert Oppenheimer and Lev Landau, hardly anyone worked in
relativity and other areas of theoretical physics between 1930 and 1960.
And Oppenheimer and Landau were largely ignored by relativists (Thorne
1994). Let me list some explanations that are often offered and indicate
why I don’t find them adequate.
1. General relativity is mathematically very difficult. The combination
of nonlinearity and coordinate freedom made it difficult to make
definite statements. This certainly underlay the problem that rela-
tivists had, and it explains why progress on understanding the theory
was slow. But it does not explain the low regard that “real” physi-
cists had for relativists. Indeed, one might have expected them to
have gained respect from the rest of physics for making even small
progress with such a difficult theory.
2. As Feynman remarked, there was little experimental data. This
meant that progress relied especially strongly on the ability to ask
and resolve the right kinds of theoretical questions. But one might
have expected the field to have exploited the few observational hints
that did exist. Chandrasekhar’s upper limit on the mass of white
dwarfs, coupled with Fritz Zwicky’s suggestion that supernova ex-
plosions led to neutron stars, were a clear invitation to explore grav-
itational collapse and the Schwarzschild solution. But only Oppen-
heimer and Landau seem to have found this interesting. Importantly,
they were physicists who approached relativity from outside, from
the point of view of the mainstream theoretical community. More-
over, it is significant that the revival of relativity started during the
1950s without the stimulus of any new experimental or observational
data. So, while an abundance of data would certainly have driven
the field in the right direction had it been available, I don’t think
that its absence explains why the field slipped into such a low state.
3. Relativity had to compete with quantum theory for good people.
As Feynman says, “few of the best men are doing work in it”. The
competition was certainly there, but I don’t believe that physics was
5

that compartmentalized in the 1930s to 1950s. Leading quantum
theorists had a deep interest in general relativity; Wolfgang Pauli
wrote a beautiful textbook on it. The theory was widely regarded
as the supreme achievement of 20th century theoretical physics. One
would think that if relativists had made their own work interesting
to mainstream physicists then they would not have worked in such
isolation. There might have been many more Oppenheimers and
Landaus crossing the gulf if the relativity community had welcomed
them and worked with them, or even been able to communicate with
them.
4. The Second World War got in the way. There is no doubt that this
seriously retarded research, removing young people from research
and inhibiting international scientific communication. The cold war
afterwards did not help. Nuclear physics had proved so useful to the
military that it (including particle physics) was well-funded after the
war, whereas relativity fell into a theoretical backwater. But I am
not convinced that this should have caused relativists to lose their
way. Attacking the key problems of this period did not require a lot
of money. A small field can still earn the respect of the majority.
And the relativity community seems to have suffered less than other
fields from the divisions of the cold war. It seems clear to me that,
once the revival started, it went significantly more rapidly because
of the relatively free intellectual interchange between Western and
1
Soviet-bloc scientists working in relativity.
I believe that the gulf opened between relativity and mainstream
physics, not directly because of the problems listed above, but because
the relativity community’s response to at least the first two problems was
to ask the wrong questions. For example, one of the serious mathematical
challenges that they faced was coordinate freedom. Ted Newman in his
talk at this meeting cataloged the way the community clearly missed op-
portunities to understand that the so-called Schwarzschild singularity is
just a coordinate effect. To us today this episode is baffling. Relativists do
not seem to have understood the importance of controlling the effects of
coordinates on their results, despite Einstein’s emphasis that the physics
should be coordinate-invariant. They even had coordinate systems avail-
able at that time (from the work of Sir Arthur Eddington and Georges
Lemaˆıtre) that went across the horizon in a non-singular way.
In the same years, quantum physicists were (at times painfully) revo-
lutionizing their physical thinking, agreeing that they should only concern
themselves with the results of measurements, which they called observ-
ables, and that they should not try to create physical models for what
can’t be measured, such as the “paths” of quantum particles. Special rel-
ativity already had a similar tradition, going back to Einstein’s gedanken
experiments, which were designed to focus attention on the outcome of
experimental measurements rather than phrase the predictions of special
relativity in terms of observer-dependent notions of time and space. Yet
1
The International Society for General Relativity and Gravitation (known as the GRG
Society), which is today the main professional society for relativists worldwide, is one of the
few societies adhering directly to IUPAP which has individual scientists as members, not
national organizations. During the cold war this structure enabled it and its predecessor
(the International Committee for General Relativity and Gravitation) to organize relatively
apolitical meetings that scientists from both sides of the Iron Curtain attended. An example
was the famous meeting in Warsaw that Feynman criticised.
6

this trend did not seem to influence research in general relativity in the
period 1930–1950 as much as it should have.
Ted Newman also mentioned another example, the deep confusion over
the concept of energy in space-times containing gravitational waves. The
resolution of this issue only began when Hermann Bondi and his suc-
cessors, who included Roger Penrose and Ted himself, discovered how to
treat radiated energy far from its source. It is easy to understand why rel-
ativists felt that they needed to clarify the idea of energy: energy is one of
the key heuristics of mainstream physics. However, I confess that I don’t
understand why relativists allowed the genuine difficulties of defining grav-
itational wave energy to stop their developing a physical understanding of
gravitational waves themselves. It appears that, because it was difficult
to define the energy of a radiating system or to localize the energy carried
by waves, relativists during this period were unable to develop any kind
of useful physical model for gravitational waves.
We know today that it is perfectly possible to describe the generation
of gravitational waves and their action on a simple detector without once
referring to energy; the quadruple formula for the generation of the waves
and the geodesic equation for their action on a simple detector are all
one needs, and these tools were available from 1918. It is also possible
to show that gravitational waves certainly deposit energy in some kinds
of detectors, without having a full global energy conservation law. In-
deed, Feynman at the earlier relativity meeting in Chapel Hill in 1957
(Bergmann 1957) presented a simple argument to show how a gravita-
tional wave would heat a detector that has internal friction. The argument
is so direct that I used a version of it myself in my undergraduate-level
relativity textbook (Schutz 2009), and I extended it there to derive the
standard expression (first put on a firm foundation by Isaacson 1968) for
the local average energy flux in gravitational waves. Feynman was I think
right to be disappointed that his argument at Chapel Hill seemed to im-
press no one and was not taken up and developed by relativists at the
time.
I think this example goes to the heart of the question. Feynman was
asking a physicist’s question, about how gravitational waves act. All he
wanted was a convincing intuitive argument that the waves were real and
that he could treat them as part of the rest of physics, for example by
extracting thermal energy from them. The relativists of his day, on the
other hand, were not interested in this kind of physicist’s answer, not
even apparently as a first step toward a more complete understanding
of gravitational waves. Instead, they seemed to want to transplant as
much of the apparatus of energy conservation as they could from the
rest of classical physics. Energy conservation is of course a key concept
in theoretical physics. But the work of Emmy Noether had shown long
before that one should not expect exact energy conservation in the absence
of time invariance, e.g. in a space-time containing gravitational waves.
In relativity energy will always be a subsidiary concept, valid in some
circumstances and useless in others. I believe Feynman found it intensely
frustrating that relativists seemed more interested in the pure-radiation
energy concept – in other words, relativity for its own sake – than in
exploring the interaction of gravitational waves with material systems –
gravitational waves as part of physics.
Feynman’s example was more than just symptomatic of the way main-
stream physics reacted to relativity. Feynman was one of the few main-
stream physicists who attempted to cross over the gulf in the 1950s, and
7

he was a prominent opinion-former. Relativity might have been accepted
back into the mainstream physics community much earlier if relativists
had succeeded in establishing a fruitful dialog with Feynman. Instead,
his well-publicized scorn surely damaged the standing of the relativity
community materially.
5. Einstein and the Gulf
It is hard to escape the conclusion that Einstein himself was one of the
main reasons that the relativity community found itself excluded from
mainstream physics. His influence on relativity research was naturally
enormous. He appears to have rejected the idea of gravitational collapse,
for reasons that today are hard to understand. He also appears not to
have been comfortable with gravitational waves, troubled by the coor-
dinate problems. Coordinates were a particular issue, as Silvio Bergia
emphasized at this meeting in connection with the issue of general covari-
ance, a principle that seems to have inhibited the development of heuristic
concepts until Wheeler began emphasizing a more explicitly geometrical
perspective on gravity. Perhaps most importantly, Einstein was focused
mainly on finding a unified field theory. He does not seem to have been
interested in the importance that general relativity had in classical theo-
retical physics, still less in its potential in astronomy. Einstein’s key bridge
to mainstream physics was the unified field theory. Its failure seems to
have left relativity without any other bridges.
One further aspect of Einstein’s position that I believe may have been
important was his rejection of the standard interpretation of quantum me-
chanics. Naturally, this isolated him from mainstream physics thinking.
Perhaps Bohr’s advice to Chandrasekhar not to go into relativity had at
least something to do with this. But I think there was a more profound
way in which Einstein’s rejection of quantum heuristics hurt relativity. As
I mentioned earlier, quantum physics changed the philosophy of theoreti-
cal physics. The key objective of quantum theory became the observable:
don’t try to describe or understand something that you cannot measure.
Relativity could have benefited in the period 1930–1950 from this imper-
ative to focus only on what is – at least in principle – measurable.
It is paradoxical that quantum physicists focused on the importance
of observables long before relativists did. After all, coordinate-invariance
was a key tenet of general relativity. The difference between quantum
theorists and relativists is that in the quantum field the principle was
practiced, while in relativity there seems to have been no systematic effort
to focus on measurables as a way to solve coordinate difficulties until the
“revival” began.
I remember, as a graduate student, my supervisor Kip Thorne empha-
sizing that if coordinate confusion threatened, then one should construct
a thought experiment and worry only about what the experimenter could
in principle measure; and he made it clear that his own supervisor, John
Archibald Wheeler, had emphasized this to him. Wheeler, of course, had
worked extensively on quantum physics before taking up relativity in the
mid-1950s. The idea of focussing on observables was natural to him and to
other physicists of his generation. It had unfortunately not developed suf-
ficiently in relativity, and it seems clear to me that introducing the strict
discipline of observability was essential to ending relativity’s isolation.
6. The Gulf Closes
8

It is arguable that a key reason that relativity pulled out of its doldrums
was that new blood entered the field with this maxim from quantum
theory deeply ingrained in their physical thinking. For people like Bondi,
Pascual Jordan, Wheeler, and Yakov Zel’dovich, among others, it was
natural to test any question about general relativity with the demand
that it be phrased in terms of observables. Is there something you can
measure, at least an experiment in principle?
At a stroke this way of thinking forces you, for example, to look for
other physical features of the black-hole horizon than just the bad behavior
of some metric components. Do the local tidal stretching forces near the
Schwarzschild “singularity” remain finite? Can a real body reach and
cross this surface in a finite amount of its own time?
Regarding gravitational waves, this perspective leads you to ask whether
a radiating body experiences a back reaction that changes its observable
behavior, and whether the radiated gravitational waves in turn produce
a measurable effect in the detector. It is then natural to ask under what
circumstances it is reasonable to expect that a definition of energy exists
that plays a role in self-gravitating systems analogous to what physicists
are used to in nonrelativistic physics; but the energy question does not
stop you from answering the questions about observable physical effects
of gravitational waves.
It may unfortunately not be a coincidence that relativity began climb-
ing out of the doldrums at about the same time that Einstein died. His
disappearance left the subject open for people to come in who had a
background in mainstream physics and who were asking different kinds of
questions. A large number of people working actively in classical theoret-
ical relativity today (leaving aside the quantum gravity and string theory
communities) can trace their lineage back to a handful of key physicists
who entered relativity between about 1950 and 1960. These physicists
reinvigorated the subject by asking the right kinds of questions, and they
answered these questions with new heuristic notions that enabled relativ-
ity to communicate with and fit into the rest of physics.
Nothing illustrates this change better than the evolution of the black
hole concept, to which I referred earlier. The term “black hole” was coined
as late as 1967 by Wheeler to describe something whose reality he initially
also doubted, but which he finally came to understand was the likely end-
point for the evolution of a large range of massive systems. Today we
talk about black holes, not just the Kerr metric or the Schwarzschild so-
lution. That is because the concept of a black hole is wider than just
these time-independent exact solutions of Einstein’s vacuum field equa-
tions. Wheeler himself took a major step toward our present picture by
showing, with Tullio Regge, that the Schwarzschild horizon and exterior
are stable against small perturbations. Immediately this meant that the
idealized Schwarzschild solution was robust enough to include in models
of more complicated physical systems: it would retain its essential prop-
erties even when disturbed. This robust object is what we call the black
hole.
Once the new generation of mathematical physicists recognized that
their job was to develop a heuristic understanding of this object, they
set to work. An immense number of research papers between 1960 and
1990, including some remarkably elegant mathematics, led to the modern
concept of a black hole.
This concept is far wider than the exact Kerr solution of Einstein’s
equations. Black holes can have accretion disks around them, in which
9

case they are not Kerr. They can have matter falling into them, so they
need not even be time-independent. They can convert matter into energy,
as Penrose showed. They radiate thermal radiation, as Stephen Hawking
showed. They even obey the laws of thermodynamics.
When an astronomer and a relativist talk about black holes, they need
this common heuristic concept. In order to use black holes in models for
astronomical systems, the astronomer needs to regard the black hole as
a kind of black box, an object whose inputs and outputs are known but
whose inner workings can be ignored. The astronomer wants to feel safe
that he can put a black hole into a binary system without worrying about
the details of the horizon or the curvature singularity inside. Relativists
today are able to provide astronomers with this black-hole black box.
7. General Relativity Is Part of Physics
This is absolutely typical of physical thinking in other fields. Astronomers
talk about stars, by which they mean a synthesis of a huge amount of
physics. Nobody can even write down the complete mathematics needed
to give an adequate description of a star. Nevertheless an astrophysi-
cist knows pretty well what a star is. The same could be said about a
laser, a superconductor, the plasma in a tokamak, or even about rela-
tively simple composite systems like atoms, protons, neutrons. Even in
front-line research, where such concepts are not settled, physicists work
hard to develop them. The string theory community uses very visual and
geometrical heuristics to describe their work. The extension of strings
to multi-dimensional branes has opened up a rich source of possible phe-
nomenology, and it is striking to me that, when I listen to talks given by
theorists about the applications of brane theory to cosmology and to grav-
itation theory, the speakers often skip completely over the mathematics in
favor of drawings that condense the mathematics into visual relationships.
I believe that this is a basic aspect of the way physicists think about
physics. The mathematical representation of the laws of physics is their
foundation, but physicists would generally be paralyzed if they could not
package up physical systems into heuristic black boxes, confident that they
know (or at least someone knows!) enough about their internal complexity
to understand how they will interact with each other.
General relativity has a reasonably well-developed set of physical con-
structs today. This was the reason, for example, that Ted Newman could
give his talk without showing any equations: when he talked about black
holes and gravitational waves, we all knew what he meant. Or at least,
those of you who are not specialists in general relativity knew something
about what he meant, and you had faith that those of us who are special-
ists knew sufficiently more about what he meant for it to be safe for us
all to talk about these concepts as physical reality! Without that faith,
physics would simply not be possible. In the 1930s relativity had few
such heuristic concepts to offer, and it did not look like it was moving
toward constructing many more of them. I suggest that this is what led
to the big gulf between relativists and mainstream theoretical physicists
between 1930 and 1950. If this picture is right, then general relativity
emerged mathematically complete in 1916, but as a theory of physics it
was not completed until the 1980s. This must be one of the most gradual
of Kuhnian revolutions ever!
10

References
DeWitt, Ccile M., and Rickles, Dean (eds.), (2011) The Role of Grav-
itation in Physics: Report from the 1957 Chapel Hill Conference, Max
Planck Research Library for the History and Development of Knowledge
(Sources 5) (Max Planck Institute for the History of Science, Berlin, Ger-
many).
Eisenstaedt, Jean (1989), “The low water mark of general relativity, 1925-
1955”, in Einstein and the History of General Relativity, eds. Howard,
Don, and Stachel, John, Birkh¨auser, Boston, MA, 277-292.
Eisenstaedt, Jean (2006), The Curious History of Relativity : how Ein-
stein’s Theory of Gravity was Lost and Found Again, Princeton University
Press, Princeton.
Feynman, Richard P. (1988), What Do You Care What Other People
Think?, W.W. Norton, New York.
Infeld, Leopold (1964), Relativistic Theories of Gravitation, Pergamon
Press, Oxford.
Isaacson, Richard (1968), “Gravitational Radiation in the Limit of High
Frequency. II. Nonlinear Terms and the Effective Stress Tensor”, Physical
Review 166 , 1272–1280.
Robinson, Ivor, Schild, Alfred, and Schu¨cking, Engelbert L. (1965), Quasi-
stellar sources and gravitational collapse, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago.
Schutz, Bernard F. (2009), A First Course in General Relativity (2nd ed.),
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Thorne, Kip S. (1994), Black Holes and Time Warps, W.W. Norton, New
York.
11