Matching subspaces in a field extension: an
2102 guA 41  ]TN.htam[  1v2972.8021:viXra
update
Shalom Eliahou∗and C´edric Lecouvey†
LMPA Joseph Liouville, FR CNRS 2956
ULCO, B.P. 699, F-62228 Calais cedex
Univ Lille Nord de France, F-59000 Lille, France
Abstract
In this paper, we formulate and prove linear analogues of results
concerning matchings in groups. A matching in a group G is a bi-
jection ϕ between two finite subsets A,B of G with the property,
motivated by old questions on symmetric tensors, that aϕ(a) ∈/ A
for all a ∈ A. Necessary and sufficient conditions on G, ensuring
the existence of matchings under appropriate hypotheses, are known.
Here we consider a similar question in a linear setting. Given a skew
field extension K ⊂ L, where K commutative and central in L, we
introduce analogous notions of matchings between finite-dimensional
K-subspaces A,B of L, and obtain existence criteria similar to those
in the group setting. Our tools mix additive number theory, combi-
natorics and algebra. The present version corrects a slight gap in the
statement of Theorem 2.6 of the published version of this paper.
Keywords. Linear Matchings; Additive combinatorics; Systems of distinct
representatives; Hall theorem; Matroids; Free transversals.
1 Introduction
Throughout the paper, we shall say field for a skew field or division ring, and
commutative field for a field in which the product is commutative.
∗eliahou@lmpa.univ-littoral.fr
†lecouvey@lmpa.univ-littoral.fr
1

Let G be a group, written multiplicatively. Let A, B ⊂ G be nonempty
finite subsets of G. A matching from A to B is a map ϕ : A → B which is
bijective and satisfies the condition
aϕ(a) ∈/ A
for all a ∈ A. This notion was introduced in [6] by Fan and Losonczy, who
n
used matchings in Z as a tool for studying an old problem of Wakeford
concerning canonical forms for symmetric tensors [19]. Obvious necessary
conditions for the existence of a matching from A to B are |A| = |B| and
1 ∈/ B. The group G is said to have the matching property if these conditions
on A, B suffice to guarantee the existence of a matching from A to B. What
groups possess the matching property, and when are there automatchings
from B to B? The following answers were first obtained by Losonczy [12] in
the abelian case, and then extended to arbitrary groups in [3].
Theorem 1.1 Let G be group. Then G has the matching property if and
only if G is torsion-free or cyclic of prime order.
Theorem 1.2 Let G be a group. Let B be a nonempty finite subset of G.
Then there is a matching from B to B if and only if 1 ∈/ B.
Theorem 1.1 and 1.2 were established using methods and tools pertaining
to additive number theory and combinatorics. Specifically, the additive tools
used are lower bounds on the size of the product set
AB = {ab | a ∈ A, b ∈ B}
in G, and the main combinatorial tool is Hall’s marriage theorem. See also
[8] for more results on matchings in groups.
Now, various additive theorems bounding |AB| have recently been trans-
posed to a linear setting, in the following sense. Given a field extension
K ⊂ L and finite-dimensional K-subspaces A, B of L, analogous lower
bounds on the dimension of hABi were established, where hABi is the K-
subspace spanned by the product set AB in L. See [10, 9, 4, 5]. Suitable
hypotheses on the extension may be needed, such as commutativity or sepa-
rability. Two main results in [4], which play a key role here, only require K
to be commutative and central in L.
2

The purpose of this paper is to show that Theorem 1.1 and 1.2 also admit
linear analogues in a field extension K ⊂ L. As in [4], we only assume that K
is commutative and central in L. In Section 2, we introduce a specific notion
of matching bases of finite-dimensional subspaces A, B of L, and state the
main results of the paper, namely Theorem 2.6 and 2.8. They are analogous
to Theorem 1.1 and 1.2, and give existence criteria for such matchings. The
possibility of matching a given basis of A to some basis of B is reformulated
in Section 3, in terms of suitable dimension estimates. In the process, we
use a linear version of Hall’s marriage theorem, derived from a more general
theorem of Rado on the existence of independent transversals in matroids.
Section 4 presents the linear versions in [4] of results in additive number
theory, that will allow us to deal with the required dimension estimates of
the preceding section. This is achieved in Section 5, where Theorem 2.6 and
2.8 are finally proved. In the last section, we introduce and study a related
notion of strong matching between subspaces of L.
2 Definitions and main results
Throughout the paper, we shall consider a field extension K ⊂ L, where
K is commutative and central in L, i.e. such that λx = xλ for all λ ∈
K, x ∈ L. Let A, B ⊂ L be finite-dimensional K-subspaces of L. Ideally,
a matching from A to B would be an isomorphism ϕ : A → B such that
aϕ(a) ∈/ A for all non-zero a ∈ A. However, we need to introduce somewhat
subtler requirements in order to obtain existence criteria analogous to those
of Theorem 1.1 and 1.2.
To start with, observe that if 0 6= a ∈ A and b ∈ B, then
−1
ab ∈/ A ⇐⇒ b ∈/ a A ∩ B.
a−1
This motivates the use of the subspace A ∩ B of B in the definition of
matched bases below.
Definition 2.1 Let A, B be n-dimensional K-subspaces of the field extension
L. Let A = {a , . . ., a }, B = {b , . . ., b } be bases of A, B respectively. We
1 n 1 n
say that A is matched to B if
a b ∈ A =⇒ b ∈ hb , . . ., b , . . ., b i
i 1 i n
b
3

for all b ∈ B and all i = 1, . . ., n, where hb , . . ., b , . . ., b i is the hyperplane
1 i n
of B spanned by the set B \ {b }; equivalently, if
i
b
−1
a A ∩ B ⊂ hb , . . ., b , . . ., b i (1)
i 1 i n
for all i = 1, . . ., n.
b
Remark 2.2 If A is matched to B in the above sense, then it follows that
a b ∈/ A,
i i
and hence a b ∈/ A, for all i = 1, . . ., n. In particular, the map a 7→ b is a
i i i i
matching, in the group setting sense, from A to B within the multiplicative
∗
group L .
Moreover, we now show that if A is matched to B, then B cannot contain
1. This necessary condition exactly mirrors the corresponding one in the
group setting.
Lemma 2.3 Let A, B be n-dimensional K-subspaces of the field extension
L. If a basis A of A can be matched to a basis B of B, then 1 ∈/ B.
Proof. Let A = {a , . . ., a }, B = {b , . . ., b } be bases of A, B respec-
1 n 1 n
tively. Assume on the contrary that 1 ∈ B. Then we have
n
−1
1 ∈ (a A ∩ B).
i
i=1
\
On the other hand, it is clear that
n
hb , . . ., b , . . ., b i = {0}.
1 i n
i=1
\
b
−1
Therefore, the inclusion a A∩B ⊂ hb , . . ., b , . . ., b i required in (1) cannot
i 1 i n
hold for all i = 1, . . ., n, and hence A cannot be matched to B.
b
With the notion of matched bases at hand, we now introduce that of
matched K-subspaces of L.
4

Definition 2.4 Let A, B be n-dimensional K-subspaces in the field extension
L. We say that A is matched to B if every basis A of A can be matched to
a basis B of B.
By the above lemma, if A is matched to B, then 1 ∈/ B. Conversely, is
the condition 1 ∈/ B sufficient to guarantee that any subspace A of the same
dimension as B is matched to B? We shall see that the answer depends on
properties of the field extension K ⊂ L.
Definition 2.5 Let K ⊂ L be a field extension. We say that L has the linear
matching property if, for every n ≥ 1 and every n-dimensional subspaces A, B
of L with 1 ∈/ B, the subspace A is matched to B.
We shall prove the following results in Section 5.
Theorem 2.6 Let K ⊂ L be a field extension, with K commutative and
central in L. Then L has the linear matching property if and only if L
1
contains no proper finite-dimensional extension over K.
Corollary 2.7 Let L be a commutative finite-dimensional Galois extension
of the (commutative) field K. Then L has the linear matching property if
and only if L is an extension of K of prime degree.
In contrast, no special hypothesis on L is needed to guarantee that any
n-dimensional subspace B avoiding 1 is matched to itself.
Theorem 2.8 Let K ⊂ L be a field extension, with K commutative and
central in L. Let B be a finite-dimensional subspace of L. Then B is matched
to itself if and only if 1 ∈/ B.
The proofs of these results involve delicate linearized versions, obtained in
[4] and recalled in Section 4, of classical addition theorems due to Kemperman
and Olson.
1
Our original statement of Theorem 2.6 in the published version of this paper [Journal of
Algebra 324 (2010) 3420-3430]was incorrect, as pointed out to us by Professors Akbari and
Aliabadi. It mistakenly stated that the linear matching property was equivalent to L being
either transcendental or an extension of prime degree over K, thereby missing all finite-
dimensional extensions of non-prime degree having no proper intermediate extensions.
(See Remark 5.4).
5

3 Dimension criteria for matchable bases
Let K ⊂ L be a field extension, with K commutative and central in L,
and let A, B ⊂ L be n-dimensional K-subspaces of L. In this section, we
reformulate the property of a basis A of A to be matchable to some basis of
B, in terms of suitable dimension estimates.
Proposition 3.1 Let A = {a , . . ., a } be a basis of A. Then A can be
1 n
matched to a basis of B if and only if, for all J ⊂ {1, . . ., n}, we have
−1
dim (a A ∩ B) ≤ n − |J|. (2)
i
i∈J
\
For the proof of this equivalence in Section 3.2, we shall need a linear
version of the classical marriage theorem of Hall [7].
3.1 Free transversals
Let E be a vector space over the field K and let E = {E , E , . . ., E } be a
1 2 n
collection of vector subspaces of E. A free transversal for E is a free family of
vectors {x , . . ., x } in E satisfying x ∈ E for all i = 1, . . ., n. The following
1 n i i
result of Rado [18] gives necessary and sufficient conditions for the existence
of a free transversal for E, very similar to those of Hall’s marriage theorem.
See also [13, 1, 14].
Theorem 3.2 Let E be a vector space over K and let E = {E , E , . . ., E }
1 2 n
be a family of vector subspaces of E. Then E admits a free transversal if and
only if
dim + E ≥ |J| (3)
i
i∈J
for all J ⊂ {1, . . ., n}.
It is not too difficult to prove this result directly, by properly mimicking
a proof of its classical counterpart. In the above-mentioned paper of Rado,
Theorem 3.2 arises as a particular case of a more general theorem concerning
the existence of independent transversals in (possibly infinite) matroids. A
finite version would read as follows [17, Chapter 12.2].
6

Theorem 3.3 Let F be a finite set, let F = {F , . . ., F } be a family of
1 n
subsets of F, and let M be a matroid over F with rank function r. Then the
family F admits a transversal which is independent in M if and only if one
has
r( F ) ≥ |J| (4)
i
i∈J
[
for all J ⊂ {1, . . ., n}.
Theorem 3.2 can be derived from Theorem 3.3 as follows. For each 1 ≤
i ≤ n, pick a basis F of the subspace E , let F = {F , . . ., F }, and set
i i 1 n
F = F .
i
1≤i≤n
[
As matroid M over F, we consider the collection of linearly independent
subsets in F, with rank function r defined by
r(S) = dim hSi
K
for all subsets S ⊂ F. Here, as earlier, hSi denotes the subspace of E
spanned by S. We now apply Theorem 3.3 in this situation. It is clear, from
the definition of the rank function r, that
r( F ) = dim + E .
i i
i∈J
i∈J
[
Thus, conditions (3) and (4) are equivalent, and an independent transversal
for F given by Theorem 3.3 yields a free transversal for the family E.
3.2 Proof of Proposition 3.1
We shall use the following standard notation. We denote by
∗
B = {f : B → K | f is linear}
the dual of B. Moreover, for any subspace C ⊂ B, we denote by
⊥ ∗
C = {f ∈ B | C ⊂ ker f}
the orthogonal of C in B∗. Recall that dim C⊥ = dim B − dim C.
7

We now prove Proposition 3.1, using Theorem 3.2 as a key ingredient.
Proof. ⇒) Assume first that A is matched to the basis B = {b , . . ., b }
1 n
of B. It follows from condition (1) that
−1
a A ∩ B ⊂ hb , . . ., b , . . ., b i
i 1 i n
for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. This implies, for any J ⊂ {1, . . ., n}, that
b
−1
(a A ∩ B) ⊂ hb , . . ., b , . . ., b i = hB \ {b | i ∈ J}i.
i 1 i n i
i∈J i∈J
\ \
b
−1
It follows that dim (a A ∩ B) ≤ n − |J|, as claimed.
i∈J i
⇐) Assume now that, for all J ⊂ {1, . . ., n}, we have
T
−1
dim (a A ∩ B) ≤ n − |J|.
i
i∈J
\
Taking the orthogonal in the dual space B∗, we get
⊥
−1
dim (a A ∩ B) ≥ |J|,
i
  !
i∈J
\
and hence
−1 ⊥
dim (a A ∩ B) ≥ |J|.
i
i∈J
X
By Theorem 3.2, the linear version of Hall’s theorem, the above dimension
bounds imply the existence of a free transversal
∗
ϕ , . . ., ϕ ∈ B
1 n
for the system of subspaces {(a−1 A ∩ B)⊥} . In other words, we have
i 1≤i≤n
−1 ⊥
ϕ ∈ (a A ∩ B) (5)
i i
for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n, and {ϕ , . . ., ϕ } is free and hence a basis of B∗.
1 n
Let B = {b , . . ., b } be the unique basis of B whose dual basis B∗ equals
1 n
{ϕ , . . ., ϕ }, i.e. such that b∗ = ϕ for all i. By (5), we have
1 n i i
∗ −1
b a A ∩ B = {0},
i i
−1 (cid:0) (cid:1)
whence a A ∩ B ⊂ hb , . . ., b , . . ., b i for all i, as desired.
i 1 i n
b 8

4 Linear versions of some additive theorems
In order to exploit the equivalence given by Proposition 3.1, we shall need
tools to establish the required dimension estimates (2). These tools will be
conveniently provided by two results in linearized additive number theory,
both established in [4].
Our first tool is a linear version of a classical theorem of Kemperman [11].
Theorem 4.1 Let K ⊂ L be a field extension, with K commutative and
central in L. Let A, B be finite-dimensional K-subspaces of L such that
K ⊂ A ∩ B. Suppose there exist subspaces A, B ⊂ L such that
A = K ⊕ A, B = K ⊕ B and K ∩ (A + B + hABi) = {0}.
Then
dimhABi ≥ dim A + dim B − 1.
For the proof of Theorem 2.8 in Section 5.1, we shall actually use the
following corollary.
Corollary 4.2 Let U, V be finite-dimensional K-subspaces of L. Assume
that U, V and UV are all three contained in a K-subspace X of L such that
K ∩ X = {0}. Then
dim X ≥ dim U + dim V.
Proof. Let A = K ⊕ U, B = K ⊕ V . Then K ∩ (U + V + hUV i) = {0}.
Therefore Theorem 4.1 applies, and gives
dimhABi ≥ dim A + dim B − 1.
Since hABi = K⊕(U+V +hUV i) ⊂ K⊕X, this gives dimhABi ≤ dim X+1.
With the equalities dim A = dim U+1 and dim B = dim V +1, we then derive
dim X ≥ dimhABi − 1 ≥ dim A + dim B − 2 ≥ dim U + dim V,
as desired.
Our second promised tool from [4] is a linear version of a classical theorem
of Olson [16]. It will be used in the proof of Theorem 2.6 in Section 5.2.
9

Theorem 4.3 Let K ⊂ L be a field extension, with K commutative and
central in L. Let A, B be finite-dimensional K-subspaces of L distinct from
{0}. Then there exist a K-subspace S of hABi and a subfield M of L such
that
(1) K ⊂ M ⊂ L,
(2) dim S ≥ dim A + dim B − dim M,
(3) MS = S or SM = S.
5 Proofs of the main results
Let again K ⊂ L be a field extension, with K commutative and central in L.
Let A, B be n-dimensional K-subspaces of L. The above linearized versions
of additive theorems will allow us to fulfill, under appropriate circumstances,
the dimension estimates required by Proposition 3.1, and thereby to prove
Theorem 2.6 and 2.8.
5.1 Proof of Theorem 2.8
Theorem 5.1 Let B be a finite-dimensional K-subspace of L. Then B is
matched to itself if and only if 1 ∈/ B.
Proof. We already know from Lemma 2.3 that if B contains 1, then B
cannot be matched to itself. Conversely, assume 1 ∈/ B. Let A = {a , . . ., a }
1 n
be any basis of B. For J ⊂ {1, . . ., n}, denote
−1
V = (a B ∩ B) = {x ∈ B | a x ∈ B for all i ∈ J}.
J i i
i∈J
\
It follows from Proposition 3.1 that A can be matched to another basis of B
if and only if
dim V ≤ n − |J| (6)
J
for all J ⊂ {1, . . ., n}. Denote now B the subspace of B spanned by the
J
subset {a | i ∈ J} of A. Then we have dim B = |J|, and
i J
B V ⊂ B
J J
10

by construction. Since 1 ∈/ B, Corollary 4.2 applies, with U, V, X standing
for B , V , B respectively. This gives
J J
dim B + dim V ≤ dim B,
J J
i.e. exactly condition (6). By Proposition 3.1, the basis A can be matched
to another basis of B. Therefore, the space B is matched to itself.
5.2 Proof of Theorem 2.6
We now turn to the characterization of all field extensions satisfying the
linear matching property.
Theorem 5.2 Let K ⊂ be a field extension, with K commutative and central
in L. Then L has the linear matching property if and only if L contains no
proper finite-dimensional extension over K.
Proof. Assume first that L is neither purely transcendental nor an ex-
tension of prime degree. Then there is an element a ∈ L, of finite degree
n ≥ 2 over K, such that K(a) & L. In particular, we have
n−1
K(a) = h1, a, . . ., a i.
Set A = K(a). Let now x ∈ L \ K(a), and set
n−1
B = ha, . . ., a , xi.
We claim that A is not matched to B. Indeed, consider the basis A =
an−1
{1, a, . . ., } of A. Since A = K(a) is a subfield of L, we have
−1 n−1
a A ∩ B = A ∩ B = ha, . . ., a i
i
−1
for all 1 ≤ i ≤ n. Therefore, the condition dim (a A ∩ B) ≤ n − |J|
i∈J i
of Proposition 3.1 does not hold for J = {1, . . ., n}, for instance. It follows
T
that A cannot be matched to a basis of B.
Conversely, assume that the only finite-dimensional subfields of L extend-
ing K are K, and L itself if it is finite-dimensional over K. The field L = K
contains no proper intermediate extension and vacuously satisfies the linear
11

matching property. Assume now L 6= K. Let A, B be n-dimensional K-
subspaces of L with 1 ∈/ B. Let A = {a , . . ., a } be any basis of A. For any
1 n
J ⊂ {1, . . ., n}, denote
−1
V = (a A ∩ B) = {x ∈ B | a x ∈ A for all i ∈ J}.
J i i
i∈J
\
By Proposition 3.1 again, we know that A can be matched to a basis of B if
and only if
dim V ≤ n − |J| (7)
J
for all J ⊂ {1, . . ., n}. As earlier, denote A the subspace of A spanned by
J
the subset {a | i ∈ J} of A. Then we have dim A = |J|, and
i J
A V ⊂ A.
J J
Set W = K ⊕ V . We have dim W = dim V + 1, and still A W ⊂ A by
J J J J J J
construction. By Theorem 4.3, applied to the subspaces A and W , there
J J
is an intermediate field extension K ⊂ M ⊂ L and a subspace T ⊂ hA W i
J J
such that
dimhA W i ≥ dim A + dim W − dim M, (8)
J J J J
and MT = T or TM = T. We cannot have M = L, for otherwise T = L;
but as T ⊂ A W ⊂ A, this would imply A = L = B, contradicting the
J J
hypothesis 1 ∈/ B. It follows that M = K, and inequality (8) yields
dim A ≥ |J| + dim V ,
J
since hA W i ⊂ A, dim W = dim V + 1 and dim M = 1. Therefore condi-
J J J J
tions (7) are satisfied, implying that A can be matched to a basis of B. It
follows that L has the linear matching property.
Corollary 5.3 Let L be a commutative finite-dimensional Galois extension
of the (commutative) field K. Then L has the linear matching property if
and only if L is an extension of K of prime degree.
Proof. Indeed, for a Galois extension of degree n, the intermediate ex-
tensions are in reversing bijection with the subgroups of the Galois group
G of order n. Thus, if n is not a prime number, then G will have proper
subgroups {1} =6 H 6= G, thereby yielding proper intermediate extensions
L ) M ) K.
12

Remark 5.4 For any non-prime integer n > 1, there exists a field extension
K ⊂ L of characteristic 0 and degree n admitting no proper intermediate
extension. It can be constructed as follows. Take L = k(X , . . ., X ) the
1 n
field of rational functions in the commutative variables X , . . ., X over an
1 n
S
arbitrary field k of characteristic 0. Set S = L n the subfield of L of rational
symmetric functions. The field L can be regarded as the decomposition field
of the polynomial
n
P(T) = (T − X ) ∈ S[T].
i
i=1
Y
Therefore L is a normal extension of S. Since L is of characteristic 0, it
is a Galois extension of S. Its Galois group is S so L has degree n! over
n
S
S. The subgroup S ⊂ S is maximal. Therefore, if we set K = L n−1,
n−1 n
the invariant subfield under the group S , then L is an extension of K of
n−1
degree n with no proper intermediate extension.
5.3 A refinement
Even if the extension K ⊂ L does not satisfy the linear matching property,
it is still possible to match some subspaces A, B of L under suitable circum-
stances. Let n (K, L) denote the smallest degree of an intermediate field
0
extension K ( M ⊂ L. Thus n (K, L) ≥ 2, and n (K, L) = ∞ if the ex-
0 0
tension is purely transcendental. Slightly adapting the proof of Theorem 2.6
yields the following result.
Theorem 5.5 Let K ⊂ L be a field extension, with K commutative and
central in L. Let A, B ⊂ L be n-dimensional subspaces of L, with 1 ∈/ B and
n < n (K, L). Then A is matched to B.
0
Proof. Let A = {a , . . ., a } be any basis of A. We proceed as in the
1 n
proof of Theorem 2.6, and use the same notation V , A , W = K ⊕ V for
J J J J
J ⊂ {1, . . ., n}. In order to ensure that A can be matched to a basis of B, it
suffices to check the condition
dim V ≤ n − |J| (9)
J
for all J ⊂ {1, . . ., n}. We have A W ⊂ A. By Theorem 4.3 applied to A
J J J
and W , there is an intermediate field extension K ⊂ M ⊂ L and a subspace
J
T ⊂ hA W i such that
J J
dimhA W i ≥ dim A + dim W − dim M, (10)
J J J J
13

and MT = T or TM = T. This means that T is either a left of a right
M-module, whence dim M divides dim T. But since T ⊂ hA W i ⊂ A, it
J J
follows that dim M ≤ n. Now, our assumption n < n (K, L) implies M = K.
0
Therefore, inequality (10) yields
dim A ≥ |J| + dim V ,
J
since hA W i ⊂ A, dim A = |J|, dim W = dim V + 1 and dim M = 1.
J J J J J
Thus (9) is satisfied, implying that A can be matched to a basis of B.
6 Strong matchings
Here we turn to a related, but much stronger notion of matching between
subspaces. An existence criterion for such matchings is much easier to estab-
lish, as we do now, independently of the preceding results.
Let K ⊂ L be a field extension, and let A, B be finite-dimensional K-
subspaces of L distinct from {0}.
Definition 6.1 A strong matching from A to B is a linear isomorphism
ϕ : A → B such that any basis A of A is matched to the basis ϕ(A) of B, in
the sense of Definition 2.1.
We start with an easy equivalent reformulation of this notion, and then
proceed with the promised existence criterion for strong matchings.
Lemma 6.2 Let ϕ : A → B be an isomorphism of K-vector spaces. The
following two statements are equivalent.
1. The map ϕ is a strong matching from A to B.
2. For any 0 6= a ∈ A and any subspace H ⊂ A such that A = hai ⊕ H,
a−1
we have A ∩ B ⊂ ϕ(H).
Proof. Assume ϕ is a strong matching. Let 0 6= a ∈ A, and let H ⊂ A
be any K-subspace such that A = hai ⊕ H. Let {a , . . ., a } be any basis
2 n
of H. Then A = {a, a , . . ., a } is a basis of A. Hence A is matched to
2 n
a−1
ϕ(A) = {ϕ(a), ϕ(a ), . . ., ϕ(a )}. This implies that A ∩ B is a subspace
2 n
of hϕ(a ), . . ., ϕ(a )i = ϕ(H).
2 n
14

Conversely, assume statement 2 holds. Let A = {a , a , . . ., a } be a basis
1 2 n
of A. For any i = 1, . . ., n, set H = ha , . . ., a , . . ., a i. Then we must have
i 1 i n
−1 [
a A ∩ B ⊂ hϕ(a ), . . ., ϕ(a ), . . ., ϕ(a )i. This proves that the basis A is
i 1 i n
matched to ϕ(A). Hence, the map ϕ is a strobng matching from A to B.
Theorem 6.3 Let K ⊂ L be a field extension. Let A, B be n-dimensional
K-subspaces of L distinct from {0}. There is a strong matching from A to
B if and only if AB ∩ A = {0}. In this case, any isomorphism ϕ : A → B is
a strong matching.
Proof. Assume ϕ : A → B is a strong matching. By Lemma 6.2, we
obtain for any 0 6= a ∈ A:
−1
a A ∩ B ⊂ ϕ(H) = ϕ H ,
  !
H H
\ \
where H ranges over all subspaces of A such that A = hai⊕H. But of course,
the intersection of all such subspaces H is reduced to {0}. Hence, we have
a−1
A ∩ B = {0} for any 0 6= a ∈ A. This means that AB ∩ A = {0}.
Conversely, assume AB ∩ A = {0}, and let ϕ : A → B be any iso-
a−1
morphism. Then, for all 0 6= a ∈ A, we have A ∩ B = {0}, whence
−1
a A ∩ B ⊂ ϕ(H) for any subspace H ⊂ A. It follows from Lemma 6.2 that
ϕ is a strong matching from A to B, as claimed.
Acknowledgement. We are most grateful to Professors Akbari and Ali-
abadi for having pointed out to us the now corrected gap in our published
version of Theorem 2.6.
References
[1] J. L. Arocha, B. Llano and M. Takane, The theorem of Philip
Hall for vector spaces, An. Inst. Mat. Univ. Nac. Auto´noma M´exico 32
(1992), 1–8 (1993).
[2] R. Diestel, Graph Theory, Graduate Text in Mathematics 173,
Springer-Verlag, New York, 1997.
[3] S. Eliahou and C. Lecouvey, Matchings in arbitrary groups, Adv.
in Appl. Math. 40 (2008), 219–224.
15

[4] S. Eliahou and C. Lecouvey, On linear versions of some addition
theorems, Linear Multilinear Algebra 57 (2009), 759–775.
[5] S. Eliahou, M. Kervaire and C. Lecouvey, On the product of
vector spaces in a commutative field extension, J. Number Theory 129
(2009), 339–348.
[6] C. K. Fan and J. Losonczy, Matchings and canonical forms in sym-
metric tensors, Adv. Math. 117 (1996), 228–238.
[7] P. Hall, On representatives of subsets, J. London Math. Soc. 10 (1935),
26–30.
[8] Y. O. Hamidoune, On Group bijections φ with φ(B) = A and ∀a ∈
B, aφ(a) ∈/ A, preprint, arXiv:0812.2522v1 [math.CO].
[9] X.D. Hou, On a vector space analogue of Kneser’s theorem, Linear
Algebra Appl. 426 (2007), 214–227.
[10] X. D. Hou, K. H. Leung and Q. Xiang, A generalization of an
addition theorem of Kneser, J. Number Theory 97 (2002), 1–9.
[11] J. H. B. Kemperman, On complexes in a semigroup, Indag. Math. 18
(1956), 247-254.
[12] J. Losonczy, On matchings in groups, Adv. in Appl. Math. 20 (1998),
385–391.
[13] L. Mirsky and H. Perfect, Systems of representatives, J. Math.
Anal. Appl. 15 (1966), 520–568.
[14] A. G. Moshonkin, Concerning Hall’s theorem, Mathematics in
St.Petersburg, 73–77, Amer. Math. Soc. Transl. Ser. 2, 174, Amer.
Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1996.
[15] M. B. Nathanson, Additive Number Theory: Inverse Problems and
the Geometry of Sumsets, Graduate Text in Mathematics 165, Springer-
Verlag, New York, 1996.
[16] J. E. Olson, On the sum of two sets in a group, J. Number Theory 18
(1984), 110–120.
16

[17] J. G. Oxley, Matroid theory, Oxford Science Publications. The Claren-
don Press, Oxford University Press, New York, 1992.
[18] R. Rado, A theorem on independence relations, Quart. J. Math., Ox-
ford Ser. 13 (1942), 83–89.
[19] E. K. Wakeford, On canonical forms, Proc. London Math. Soc. 18
(1918-1919), 403–410.
17