Evidence of active regions in the donor of the Algol-type
binary V393 Scorpii and test for the dynamo model of
its long cycle.
Ronald E. Mennickenta, Dominik R.G. Schleichera, Rub´en San
8102 luJ 3  ]RS.hp-ortsa[  1v46210.7081:viXra
Martin-Pereza
aDepartamento de Astronom´ıa, Casilla 160-C, Universidad de Concepci´on, Chile
Abstract
V393Scorpii is a member of the subclass of Algols dubbed Double Periodic
Variables (DPVs). These are semidetached binaries with B-type primaries
showing a long-photometric cycle lasting in average 33 times the orbital pe-
riod. We describe the behavior of unreported metallic emission lines in the
cool stellar component of this system. The emissions can be single or double
for a same line and sometimes show velocity shifts regarding the velocity of
the center of mass of the star. In addition, these lines are stronger during
the high state. This behavior suggests the presence of active regions in the
surface of the rapidly rotating A7 donor covering a fraction of the visible
hemisphere, which have larger emissivity during the high state. Our finding
supports the recently proposed dynamo model for the long cycle of DPVs
proposed by Schleicher & Mennickent. The model predicts an increase of the
dynamo number of the donor during epochs of mass transfer in this system,
and a theoretical long/orbital period ratio very close to the observed one at
the present system age.
Keywords: stars: binaries: eclipsing, spectroscopic, stars: circumstellar
matter, emission-line, Be, evolution, starspots
1. Introduction
Double Periodic Variables (DPVs) are a class of Algol binaries showing
a long photometric cycle lasting about 33 times the orbital period; they
Email address: rmennick@udec.cl (Ronald E. Mennickent)
Preprint submitted to Pub. of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific July 4, 2018

are usually hotter and more massive than classical Algols and more than
250 of them have been found in the Galaxy and the Magellanic Clouds
[10, 11, 19, 13, 14, 7, 3, 18, 2, 15, 9]. Recently, Mennickent, Otero, &
Ko(cid:32)laczkowski [16] showed, based on a limited number of well studied sys-
tems, that DPVs are those semi-detached Algols with B-type primaries of
radius slightly larger than the critical radius1 and also that they host rela-
tively stable optically thick accretion discs of typical extension of a few tens
of solar radii. Evolutionary studies of DPVs suggest that they are found
inside or close to an episode of mass transfer due to Roche lobe overflow by
the donor [16].
It has been suggested that a magnetic dynamo is responsible for the long
cycles of DPVs [22]. The idea is that the synchronized donor rotates at a
significant fraction of the critical velocity, and becomes unstable to inner
convective motions, generating a magnetic dynamo similar to those observed
in sun-like stars or possibly RSCVn binaries. The above authors shows
that the dynamo period is proportional to the stellar rotational period and
only weakly dependent of the stellar mass. Relevant to the discussion is the
existence of chromospheric emission in the mass-losing star of some Algols,
revealed in the emission cores of the CaII H and K lines or the alternate
changes of the orbital period [4, 8] or even in emissivity maps obtained with
the technique of Doppler imaging [20]. Chromospherically active regions have
also been invoked as the cause for the coronal X-ray emission observed in
some short-period Algol binaries by satellites as ASCA and ROSAT [21, 23].
In this paper we give support for the dynamo model of the long cycle of
DPVs, based on a study of spectroscopic data densely covering the orbital
and long cycles of the DPV V393Scorpii. This binary has an orbital period
of 7.71 days and a long cycle of 253 days. The basic stellar and orbital pa-
rameters have been obtained from the model of the light curve by Mennickent
et al. [13]. The system consists of a 2.0 M inflated donor transferring mass
(cid:12)
onto a 7.8 M gainer which is surrounded by an optically thick disc of ra-
(cid:12)
dial extension about 9.5 R and vertical thickness about 2 R . The orbital
(cid:12) (cid:12)
separation for the system is 35.1 R and the system is observed under incli-
(cid:12)
nation of 80 degree. The system shows enhanced Balmer emission during the
long-cycle maximum attributed to a disc-wind and also CI6588 and MgII
4481 emissions arising from the donor, attributing a chromospherically-active
1The critical radius just allows the stream coming from the secondary to hit the primary.
2

character to this star [14].
While Mennickent et al. [14] presented the analysis of the main optical
spectroscopic features of V393Scorpii (i.e. Balmer and HeI lines), here we
present a study of weak metallic lines most of them not previously reported
and show that these lines can be used as diagnostics of the chromospherically
active donor star. In past studies, variable Balmer emission was interpreted
as a signature of a bipolar wind emerging from the stream/disc impact region
[14]. In addition, the study of HI infrared lines also provides evidence for the
presence of an intermediate-latitude wind and suggests that material escapes
in the orbital plane from the disk through the L point [12]. In order to
3
place our new study into context, a summary of the spectral lines previously
studied in this system, and its significance, is given in Table1.
The finding of magnetic activity in DPV donors might have wide as-
trophysical significance, since, contrary to G/K/M dwarfs with solar-type
magnetic cycles, these relatively hotter A/F-type giants have not been much
explored as sites of magnetic activity, much less as hosts of magnetic dy-
namos; in some cases magnetic activity is expected to be limited to the
stellar core of A-type dwarfs, as result of a fossil field which might explain
the Ap stars [5]. It is possible that rapid rotation plus structural changes
happening during expansion to the giant stage might favor the appearance
of magnetic instability behind the stellar surface bringing the dynamo into
existence.
This paper is organized as follow: in Section 2 we present a summary of
our observations and methodology. In Section 3 we present the results of our
spectroscopic analysis of FeI, FeII, MgII, CI and TiII lines. In Section 4
we discuss the origin of these lines supporting the existence of active regions
in the donor star. In Section 5 we explore the evolution of the binary along
with the dynamo properties following the Schleicher & Mennickent model for
the long cycle. Finally, in Section 6, we summarize the main conclusions of
this research.
2. Observations and methodology
The full description of the observational material, the observing log and
details of data reduction and analysis can be found in Mennickent et al. [14].
Here we give only a brief summary. The spectroscopic data span 3 years
between 2007 to 2010 and consist of 555 spectra obtained with several spec-
trographs, mostly with resolution R ∼ 40.000 and covering the wavelength
3

Table 1: Spectral lines studies in V393Sco. Wavelengths are in nanometers.
Reference & Highlights
Line
Mennickent et al. [12] Evidence of high-latitude wind
UV + infrared range and equatorial outflow.
Lα
SiIV 139.37, 140.28
AlIII 185.47, 186.28
MgI 1081.4
HeI 1083.3, 1091.6
SiI 1084.7, 1088.8
MgII 1091.7
Mennickent et al. [14] Evidence of bipolar wind linked
Optical range (stronger lines) to the long cycle and active donor.
Hα, Hβ, Hγ
MgII 448.1
CI 493.2, 658.8
HeI 587.5, 667.8
SiI 634.7, 637.1
OI 777.3
This paper Donor activity related to the long cycle.
Optical range (weaker lines)
TiII 446.8, 4501.3
MgII 448.2
FeII 448.9, 450.8, 451.5, 495.8
CI 493.2, CI 658.8
4

˚
region of 3350-9500 A, with S/N usually above 100. They are corrected by
earth translational motion and normalized to the continuum. The RVs pre-
sented in this paper are heliocentric ones, they are obtained after subtracting
the earth velocity relative to the Sun. In this paper we present the contin-
uum normalized wavelength calibrated spectra and also the residual spectra
obtained after subtracting the theoretical donor spectrum, considering its
fractional light contribution in each wavelength range and each orbital phase.
The ephemerides have the usual meaning, phase Φ = 0.0 for the orbital cy-
o
cle refers to the primary eclipse, i.e. inferior conjunction of the donor, and
phase Φ = 0.0 for the long cycle refers to the epoch of maximum brightness
l
for this cycle.
3. Results
3.1. Detection of metallic emission lines
We find emission lines of the following elements FeI, FeII, TiII, CI and
MgII. Weak emission, sometimes double and sometimes single, were detected
in the cores of metallic lines even before processing the spectra, mainly near
main and secondary eclipse. Specially notable is the double emission of the
MgII4481 line (Fig.1). The above lines are usually found in absorption
in the atmospheres of A-type stars, but the character of emission indicates
a different formation mechanism. The presence of double emission in the
context of close interacting binaries is usually interpreted in terms of rotation
of the emitting material, and explained as the Doppler splitting of frequencies
of photons coming from the receding and approaching sides of the emitting
region. Double emission lines are usually interpreted as signatures of an
emitting disk.
3.2. Radial velocity and emission line strength variability
The CI4932 emission is almost always seen as a single peak with a red
absorption component possibly BaII4934.09. The radial velocity (RV) of
CI4932 emission follows almost perfectly the donor RV (Fig.2).
The TiII 4501.3, FeII 4508.3 and FeII 4515.3 single emissions follow a
singular RV curve with γ velocity close to the systemic velocity, viz.-12 km/s
(Fig.2). At this and following graphs we show for comparison the theoretical
RV curves of hypothetical emitting material co-rotating with the binary at
the inner Lagrange point (L ) and the points located ± R from the donor
1 d
center along the orbital semi-major axis, here named “donor outer face” and
5

“donor inner face”, respectively. For a semidetached system the point on the
donor surface closer to the center of mass should be placed at L , i.e. if the
1
star fills its Roche lobe it departs from spherical symmetry. We notice that
near Φ = 0.6 two distinct velocities for the single emission can be found.
o
The RVs follow different reference lines suggesting the existence of active
regions at different sides of the donor star.
At the red emission wing of the Hα line we found CI6587.75 in emission.
This can be found as single peak or double peak emission with a mean sep-
aration of 53 ± 9 (std) km s−1 (42 measurements averaged). Their radial
velocity follows the donor RV. In all cases when emission is detected, this
is single and never double at Φ = 0.5. On the contrary, at Φ = 0.0 both
o o
kinds of profiles are observed (Fig.3). This tendency is observed in all lines
described in this section, MgII 4482 (Fig.4) and FeI4957.6 (Fig.5). The
average peak separation for 14 double lines of FeI4957.6 is 78 ± 7 km s−1.
Note that the single emission is not always observed with the donor RV, but
sometimes with larger or smaller velocity, appearing as a blue or red emis-
sion peak. The peak separations above are close to the projected rotational
velocity of the donor, viz. 60 km s−1 [14]. This fact, along with the alter-
nating single/double nature of the peaks, might indicate a rotational origin
for the splitting of the lines, if formed in different active regions in the stellar
surface.
The equivalent width of the CI4932 residual emission increases sharply
near Φ = 0.0 and decreases smoothly at Φ = 0.5. The MgII4482 residual
o o
emission also increases at primary eclipse, but does not decrease at secondary
eclipse. It also increases around orbital phase 0.7 (Fig.6), something also
observed in CI4932 but not so prominently.
4. Origin of the metallic emission lines
The analysis of combined RV and EW data allow us to place the origin
of the metallic emission lines at the donor star. In fact, the increase of the
emission during primary eclipse can be explained as non-occultation of the
source (the donor, Fig.6) while the main continuum flux source (gainer) is
occulted. The decrease of the emission during secondary eclipse in CI4932
can be explained as occultation of the emitting source (the donor, Fig.6 right
panel). This origin is also consistent with the emission radial velocity roughly
following the velocity of the donor center of mass. The different behavior
of the MgII emission strength during the secondary minimum (Fig.6 left
6

  H J D  2 4 5 4 3 0 1 .0  +  (0 .5 0 9 , 0 .5 7 8 , 0 .6 0  1 , 0 .6 2 4 ); F =0.57- 0.59, F =0.03   
o l
1 .2 5
1 .2
1 .2 0
tnatsnoc + xu lf dezilamron)s/mk( ytic olev laidar
tnatsnoc+ xulf dezilamron)s/mk( yticolev laidar 1 .1 5 0 .0 1 3 , 0 .9 0
1 .0
1 .1 0
1 .0 5 0 .9 7 4 , 0 .7 9 6 7  k m  s -1   
1 .0 0
0 .8
0 .5 3 2 , 0 .3 4
0 .9 5
0 .9 0
4 4 9 5 4 5 0 0 4 5 0 5 4 5 1 0 4 5 1 5 4 5 2 0 4 4 6 5 4 4 7 0 4 4 7 5 4 4 8 0 4 4 8 5
A A
w a v e le n g th  ( ) w a v e le n g th ( )
Figure 1: Left: Examples of core emission in the TiII 4501.3, FeII 4508.3 and FeII 4515.3
lines. These spectra are not donor-subtracted and show that the detected emission is
not an artifact of the process of removal of the underlying donor spectrum. Labels show
the orbital and long-cycle phases. Right: Examples of double emission in TiII4468.5,
MgII4481 and FeII4489.2. Four donor subtracted consecutive spectra are shown (the
last one at the top) along with marks indicating double emission profiles. As illustration
of the effect of the subtraction procedure, the original spectrum at HJD 2454301.578 (black
solid line) is over-plotted with its donor template (dashed line). Vertical dashed lines show
the central wavelengths of HeI4471 and MgII4481.
   
3 0 0  C I 4 9 3 2  m a in  e m is s io n  p e a k 2 0 0  T i II 4 5 0 1
 d o n o r R V  F e  II 4 5 0 8
 s y s te m ic  v e lo c ity  F e  II 4 5 1 5
 re d  a b s o rp tio n  c o m p o n e n t  R V  d o n o r
2 0 0  R V  a t d o n o r o u te r fa c e
1 0 0
 R V  a t d o n o r in n e r fa c e
 R V  a t L
1
1 0 0
0
0
-1 0 0
-1 0 0
-2 0 0
-2 0 0
-3 0 0
0 .0 0 .1 0 .2 0 .3 0 .4 0 .5 0 .6 0 .7 0 .8 0 .9 1 .0 0 .0 0 .1 0 .2 0 .3 0 .4 0 .5 0 .6 0 .7 0 .8 0 .9 1 .0
o r b ita l p h a s e o r b ita l p h a s e
Figure 2: Left: The RV for the CI4932 main emission feature and its redward absorption
line (possibly BaII4934). Right: The radial velocity for the single emission detected in
the donor subtracted lines TiII 4501.3, FeII 4508.3 and FeII 4515.3 along with synthetic
RV curves.
7

 
 
2 5
artceps kaep elbuoD artceps kaeP elgniS
2 0 0 2 0
 sin g le  e m issio n  p e a k
 d o n o r R V
 d o u b le  e m issio n  b lu e  p e a k 1 5
 d o u b le  e m issio n  re d  p e a k
  
1 0 0  R V  a t d o n o r in n e r fa ce 1 0
 R V   a t d o n o r o u te r fa ce
)s/mk( yticolev laidar
 R V  a t L 1 5
 syste m ic ve lo city
0 0  
0 .0 0 .2 0 .4 0 .6 0 .8 1 .0
2 5
-1 0 0
2 0
1 5
-2 0 0
1 0
5
-3 0 0 0
0 .0 0 .1 0 .2 0 .3 0 .4 0 .5 0 .6 0 .7 0 .8 0 .9 1 .0 0 .0 0 .2 0 .4 0 .6 0 .8 1 .0
o r b ita l p h a s e lo n g  c y c le  p h a s e
Figure 3: Left: Radial velocities for the CI6587.75 line. Some illustrative synthetic RV
curves are also shown. Right: Histograms showing the occurrence of single and double
peak emission.
panel) might indicate a slightly different place of formation, but still at the
secondary star, as evident from its RV curve.
We notice that the fact that the emission equivalent width is similar at
low and high stage (even larger in high stage in occasions), indicates that the
relative contribution of the line emission remains almost constant. Since the
continuum is larger during high stage this means that the intrinsic emission
is larger at high stage.
The peculiar positions of single or double emissions regarding the donor
radial velocity can be interpreted in terms of active emitting regions in the
chromosphere of the donor, which appear shifted in velocity according to their
position in the atmosphere and its projected rotational velocity regarding the
observer. To establish the exact geometry of the active regions is beyond the
hope of this paper, and probably far from the possibilities with the current
data. A detailed analysis of the donor emission lines might, through the
technique of Doppler imaging or eclipse mapping, yield more light on this
point.
8

 
 
3 5
artceps kaep elbuoD artceps kaep elgniSartceps kaep elbuoD artceps kaep elgniS
3 0
2 0 0
 sin g le  e m issio n  p e a k  2 5
 d o n o r R V
 syste m ic ve lo city 2 0
 d o u b le  e m issio n  b lu e  p e a k
 d o u b le  e m issio n  re d  p e a k 1 5     
1 0 0
 R V  a t d o n o r o u te r fa ce
)s/mk( yticolev laidar)s/mk( yticolev laidar  R V  a t d o n o r in n e r fa ce 1 0
 R V  a t L 1 5
0  
0 0 .0 0 .2 0 .4 0 .6 0 .8 1 .0
3 5
3 0
-1 0 0
2 5
2 0
1 5
-2 0 0
1 0
5
0
0 .0 0 .1 0 .2 0 .3 0 .4 0 .5 0 .6 0 .7 0 .8 0 .9 1 .0 0 .0 0 .2 0 .4 0 .6 0 .8 1 .0
o r b ita l p h a s e lo n g  c y c le  p h a s e
Figure 4: Left: Radial velocities for the MgII4481 emission line. Some illustrative
synthetic RV curves are also shown. Right: Histograms showing the occurrence of single
and double peak emission.
 
 
4 5
4 0
2 0 0  s in g le  e m is s io n  p e a k
 d o n o r R V 3 5
 R V  a t d o n o r o u te r fa c e 3 0
 R V  a t d o n o r in n e r fa c e 2 5
1 0 0  R V  a t L 1 2 0
 s y s te m ic  v e lo c ity
1 5
 d o u b le  e m is s io n  b lu e  p e a k
 d o u b le  e m is s io n  re d  p e a k 1 0
5
0
0  
0 .0 0 .2 0 .4 0 .6 0 .8 1 .0
4 0
-1 0 0
3 0
-2 0 0 2 0
1 0
-3 0 0
0
0 .0 0 .1 0 .2 0 .3 0 .4 0 .5 0 .6 0 .7 0 .8 0 .9 1 .0 0 .0 0 .2 0 .4 0 .6 0 .8 1 .0
o r b ita l p h a s e lo n g  c y c le  p h a s e
Figure 5: Left: Radial velocities for the FeI4957.6. emission line. Some illustrative
synthetic RV curves are also shown. Right: Histograms showing the occurrence of single
and double peak emission.
9

| 0   | 1   |
|:----|:----|
|     |     |

 
0 .5 0 .5
 m in  m a x
 m a x  m in
0 .4 0 .4
)(WE-
A 0 .3 )(WE- 0 .3
A
me-1844
2394
 
0 .2 0 .2
0 .1 0 .1
0 .0 0 .0
0 .4 0 .6 0 .8 1 .0 1 .2 1 .4 1 .6 0 .4 0 .6 0 .8 1 .0 1 .2 1 .4 1 .6
o r b ita l p h a s e o r b ita l p h a s e
Figure 6: The equivalent width for 0.8 < Φ < 0.2 (max) and 0.2 ≤ Φ ≤ 0.8 (min) for
l l
MgII4481 (left) and CI4932 (right) emission lines.
5. A magnetic dynamo in V 393 Scorpii
For the theoretical interpretation of the system, we pursue a fit using
the system parameters to the publicly available van Rensbergen et al. [26]2
models. Through these models, we obtain physical quantities of the donor
and gainer stars, such as the convective velocity v and the pressure scale
c
height H . If the long cycle is interpreted to be due to a magnetic dynamo,
p
it can be calculated from the following relation based on Soon, Baliunas, &
Zhang [25] and Baliunas et al. [1]:
P = Dα × P ,
long orb
where D is the dynamo number of the donor star and α an index typically
between 1 and 5. The dynamo number can be estimated as D =Ro−2, with
3 6
Ro the Rossby number. The latter follows form the expression by Soker [24],
(cid:18) (cid:19)−1 (cid:18) (cid:19)−1 (cid:18) (cid:19)
(cid:16) v (cid:17) H ω P
c p kep
Ro = 9 ,
10km s−1 40R 0.1ω yr
(cid:12) kep
where ω is the stellar rotational angular velocity, ω the Keplerian orbital
Kep
angular velocity and P is the orbital period of a test particle moving
Kep
in a Keplerian orbit along the equator of the donor star. These relations
2http://cdsarc.u-strasbg.fr/viz-bin/Cat?J/A+A/487/1129
10

have been applied by Schleicher & Mennickent [22] to a set of well-studied
DPV systems, obtaining a good fit with α ∼ 0.31. More recently, Navarrete
et al. [17] have shown that the model can also successfully reproduce the
modulation periods observed in post-common-envelope binaries (PCEBs).
In Fig.7 and 8, we show the best-fit binary evolution model by van Rens-
bergen et al. [26], focusing on the evolution of mass and radius of the gainer
and donor stars, the best fit parameters and the comparison with the ob-
served values (see also Mennickent et al. [13] for procedure and methodology
regarding the stellar and orbital parameters). Interesting, we find also a
good agreement between the observed P and the prediction of the model.
long
The log(Plong/Porb) = 1.516 while log(Plong/Porb) = 1.576. This
observed model
means a difference between period ratios between 32.8 and 37.7 i.e. ∼ 15 %,
slightly smaller than the value of 20% obtained by [22] using the observed
data and the dynamo model. We note that the evolutionary stage of the sys-
tem corresponds to a period just posterior to active mass loss, where many
of the dynamical parameters are changing as a function of time. This can be
seen particularly also in the expected time evolution of the dynamo number
and the ratio of long-to-short period given in Fig.8, indicating that after
an initial rise, the expected long period drops considerably at a stellar age
of about 80 million years. It is conceivable that the long periods become
observable due to this drop, so that they lie in the range where they can
be well-studied and measured. It will be interesting to explore whether a
similar behavior can be found in other DPV systems (San Martin et al., in
preparation).
6. Conclusions
In this paper we report the appearance of metallic emission lines in the
interacting binary and Double Periodic Variable V393Sco. Some of the
FeII and TiII lines are reported for the first time in the literature of this
system. The radial velocity of these features and its variability suggest an
origin in a chromospherically active donor star. Especially interesting are
the shifts observed in the radial velocity of some of these lines during the
orbital cycle, which might indicate an origin in active regions filling a fraction
of the surface of the donor star. The emission of these features increases
during long-cycle maximum, suggesting that the donor is more active at
these epochs, eventually increasing the mass transfer onto the gainer. This
should naturally explain the larger Balmer emission observed during high
11

Figure 7: The best model for V393Sco according to the van Rensbergen et al. [26] evolu-
tionary tracks and the current system position.
12

Figure 8: Left: The evolution of the dynamo number and period ratio for V393Sco.
Right: The evolution of the mass transfer rate and period ratio enlarging the epoch of
mass transfer.
13

| 0   | 1   |
|:----|:----|
|     |     |

| 0   | 1   |
|:----|:----|
|     |     |

state. The picture emerges of a long cycle reflecting changes in mass transfer
which are modulated by magnetic activity in the donor. In extreme cases,
the disc itself might change its radius modulated by variable mass transfer
[6]. We tested the above assumption applying the Schleicher & Mennickent
[22] model for the long DPV cycle of V393Sco obtaining good agreement.
In particular, we observe that the system is found after a stage of rapid mass
transfer and rapid changes in dynamo number; the model predicts a length
of the long cycle very close to the observed one.
Acknowledgments
We acknowledge an anonymous referee for useful comments regarding the
first version of this paper. R.E.M. acknowledges support by VRID-Enlace
216.016.002-1.0 and the BASAL Centro de Astrof´ısica y Tecnolog´ıas Afines
(CATA) PFB–06/2007. DRGS and RISMP thank for funding via Fondecyt
regular (project code 1161247) and from the ”Concurso Proyectos Interna-
cionales de Investigaci´on, Convocatoria 2015” (project code PII20150171).
References
[1] Baliunas S. L., Nesme-Ribes E., Sokoloff D., Soon W. H., 1996, ApJ, 460,
848
[2] Barr´ıa D., Mennickent R. E., Graczyk D., Ko(cid:32)laczkowski Z., 2014, A&A,
567, A140
[3] Barr´ıa D., Mennickent R. E., Schmidtobreick L., Djuraˇsevi´c G.,
Kol(cid:32)aczkowski Z., Michalska G., Vuˇckovi´c M., Niemczura E., 2013, A&A,
552, A63
[4] Bolton C. T., 1989, SSRv, 50, 311
[5] Featherstone N. A., Browning M. K., Brun A. S., Toomre J., 2009, ApJ,
705, 1000
[6] Garc´es L J., Mennickent R. E., Djuraˇsevi´c G., Poleski R., Soszyn´ski I.,
2018, MNRAS, 477, L11
[7] Garrido H. E., Mennickent R. E., Djuraˇsevi´c G., Ko(cid:32)laczkowski Z., Niem-
czura E., Mennekens N., 2013, MNRAS, 428, 1594
14

[8] Hall D. S., 1989, SSRv, 50, 219
[9] Mennickent R. E., 2017, SerAJ, 194, 1
[10] Mennickent R. E., Pietrzyn´ski G., Diaz M., Gieren W., 2003, A&A, 399,
L47
[11] Mennickent R. E., Ko(cid:32)laczkowski Z., Michalska G., Pietrzyn´ski G., Gal-
lardo R., Cidale L., Granada A., Gieren W., 2008, MNRAS, 389, 1605
[12] Mennickent R. E., Ko(cid:32)laczkowski Z., Graczyk D., Ojeda J., 2010, MN-
RAS, 405, 1947
[13] Mennickent R. E., Djuraˇsevi´c G., Ko(cid:32)laczkowski Z., Michalska G., 2012,
MNRAS, 421, 862
[14] Mennickent R. E., Ko(cid:32)laczkowski Z., Djurasevic G., Niemczura E., Diaz
M., Cur´e M., Araya I., Peters G. J., 2012, MNRAS, 427, 607
[15] Mennickent R. E., Zharikov S., Cabezas M., Djuraˇsevi´c G., 2016, MN-
RAS, 461, 1674
[16] Mennickent R. E., Otero S., Ko(cid:32)laczkowski Z., 2016, MNRAS, 455, 1728
[17] Navarrete F. H., Schleicher D. R. G., Zamponi J., Vo¨lschow M., 2018,
arXiv, arXiv:1803.07637
[18] Pawlak M., et al., 2013, AcA, 63, 323
[19] Poleski R., Soszyn´ski I., Udalski A., Szyman´ski M. K., Kubiak M.,
Pietrzyn´ski G., Wyrzykowski L(cid:32) ., Ulaczyk K., 2010, AcA, 60, 179
[20] Richards M. T., Cocking A. S., Fisher J. G., Conover M. J., 2014, ApJ,
795, 160
[21] Richards M. T., Albright G. E., 1993, ApJS, 88, 199
[22] Schleicher D. R. G., Mennickent R. E., 2017, A&A, 602, A109
[23] Singh K. P., Drake S. A., White N. E., 1995, ApJ, 445, 840
[24] Soker N., 2000, ApJ, 540, 436
15

[25] Soon W. H., Baliunas S. L., Zhang Q., 1993, ApJ, 414, L33
[26] van Rensbergen W., De Greve J. P., De Loore C., Mennekens N., 2008,
A&A, 487, 1129
16