Available online at    https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7193353                 Research Article 
                                       
 
  
 
The Developing Trade Relations Between Turkey and Africa in the Last Decade: The 
Case of Somalia 
Sadak Mohamud Hassan1 
Received, 17 September 2022                    Accepted, 5 October 2022                    Available Online, 13 October 2022                     
 
 
1Ondokuz Mayis University, Körfez, 19 Mayıs Ünv., 55270 Atakum/Samsun, Turkey  
*Author for Correspondence ORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8581-6575; saadaqyare0120@hotmail.com 
 
ABSTRACT           
Today, Africa has become a centre of attraction and power for global actors with its geopolitical 
location, strategic trade routes, rich energy and underground resources, agricultural potential, 
growing and developing market. While Turkey's diplomatic relations network in Africa shows 
its effect in economic, political, and social fields, it also contributes to the development of trade 
between  Turkey  and  Africa  due  to  the  developing  economic  relations.  In  this  study,  the 
developing  trade  relations  between  Turkey  and  Africa  in  the  last  decade,  especially  the 
economic and trade relations between Turkey and Somalia are discussed. As a result of the 
research, it was concluded that the trade between Turkey and Somalia has increased steadily in 
the last ten years (2011-2020). While the trade volume between the two countries was only $42 
million in 2011, ten years later, in 2020, the volume of foreign trade was $270.9 million.  
Keywords: Turkey, Africa, Somalia, Foreign Trade, Import-Export.    
INTRODUCTION   
Africa is the second largest continent in the world after Asia, considering the population density 
and area. The African continent covers 6% of the world's surface area and 24.4% of the world's 
land area, with an area of 30.8 million km², if many islands of large and small sizes are included 
in the calculations. In terms of population density, it constitutes 15% of the world's population 
(Sayre, 1999, p. 6). Africa is surrounded by the Indian Ocean in the south, the Atlantic Ocean 
in the west, the Mediterranean Sea in the north, the Sinai Peninsula, the Red Sea, and the Suez 
50 

| Available online at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7193353 Research Article   |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                               |

Daha International University Academic Journal (DIUAJ)               Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022                                                         diuaj.com         
  
Canal  in  the  east.  There  are  54  independent  states,  9  regions,  and  3  limited  number  of 
recognized states in the continent (Hazar, 2011, p. 2). When all the continents in the world are 
taken into account, the continent with the youngest population is the African continent. To put 
it statistically, half of the people living on the African continent are under the age of 19. If we 
look at the face measurement, according to the size of the countries on the map, the largest 
country  is  Algeria.  However,  Nigeria  is  the  most  populous  African  country  in  terms  of 
population density (Sayre, 1999, p. 3). It is known that Africa has achieved stable growth rates 
in the last 10 years and has increased its income from foreign aid and investments. Considering 
these developments, it is possible to talk about a partial recovery in the continent, but it is seen 
that these developments have a limited effect on poverty reduction and integration with the 
world economy (Kızılarslan, 2009, p. 11).  It is generally accepted that Africa needs increased 
investment and trade opportunities rather than aid. The fact that African countries, which have 
been neglected until now, are rich in natural resources, especially oil, has recently increased 
the importance of African countries. Turkey has adopted an export-based growth policy since 
1980(Anyanwu, J. C., 2006,p.4.) For this reason, Turkey's trade with Africa has become more 
and more important due to both the "emerging Africa" phenomenon and the export-oriented 
growth policy adopted by Turkey.In this study, the commercial relations that have developed 
between Africa and Turkey in the last ten years, especially the economic and trade relations 
between Somalia and Turkey, have been tried to be revealed.   
General Information About the African Continent  
Africa lies above the equator with an almost equal extension of south and north. The division 
of Africa into almost equal parts along the equator causes the climatic and physical conditions 
in the north to repeat themselves in the south. Africa is the most tropical of all continents. The 
climate  and  vegetation  range  from  equatorial  rainforests,  tropical  deserts,  and  savanna 
grasslands to the Mediterranean (Tucker, C. J., Townshend, J. R., & Goff, T. E. (1985).. The 
Sahara Desert, the largest of its kind anywhere in the world, spans approximately 10.4 million 
km2 from north to south (Roux, 2013, p. 8). Africa has eight major physical regions: the Sahara, 
the Sahel, the Ethiopian Highlands, the Savanna, the Swahili Coast, the Rainforest, the African 
Great Lakes, and South Africa. Some of these regions cover broad bands of the continent such 
as the Sahara and the Sahel, while others are isolated areas such as the Ethiopian Highlands 
and the Great Lakes. Each of these regions has its own animal and plant communities (Hazar, 
2011, p. 7).  
51 
 

Daha International University Academic Journal (DIUAJ)               Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022                                                         diuaj.com         
  
 
 
Figure 1: General Map of the African Continent 
Africa map 
 
 
Source: geomap.com  
There are not many gulfs in the African continent, which has a geographical structure where 
natural harbour formations are not experienced because its coasts are naturally flat. The most 
important island that the continent has is the island of Madagascar, one of the largest islands in 
the world. It is possible to see the positions of the countries in the continent on the map above 
(Hazar, 2011, p. 5).  
Competing Elements in Africa   
It is estimated that the influence of African countries will increase in the 21st century. Although 
it cannot provide continuity, some of the world's top 10 growing economies are located in the 
African continent. In addition, it still continues to be the focus of attention with its existing 
hydrocarbon deposits and rich mines (Ferhavi, 2013a, p. 3). 
52 
 

Daha International University Academic Journal (DIUAJ)               Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022                                                         diuaj.com         
  
China and India, which are seen as two rising powers recently, have also joined the competition. 
Israel, Japan, and Brazil are among the countries that have difficulty in finding a place for 
themselves in this continent. Italy, on the other hand, continues to exist mostly in North and 
East Africa. The aim of these countries competing in Africa is to benefit from the economic 
resources of the continent (Carmody, P. R., & Owusu, F. Y. (2007).. Some countries use 
military force for their economic and political interests in Africa. The countries that militarily 
control the strategic places of the African continent are seen as the USA, China, Israel, England, 
and France. China's relations with Africa, which has developed with the highest economic 
growth rates in the world in recent years and has become a global actor with its modernized 
army, draw attention. Although the history of China-Africa relations is more than five hundred 
years old, relations have never been the same as in the 21st century. China has greatly increased 
its visibility in the Continent, especially through its economic activities (Anadolu Agency, 
2018).  Turkey's relations with Africa, one of the areas neglected for many years, are among 
the most important agenda items of Turkish Foreign Policy today. Africa-Turkey relations, 
which started to change with the AK (The Justice and Development Party) government that 
came to power in 2002, has taken its place among the most successful areas of Turkish foreign 
policy today. Sub-Saharan Africa, which has been struggling with hunger, internal turmoil, and 
epidemics for many years since the first years of the new government, and therefore often 
ignored in foreign policy, has also entered Turkey's area of interest (Özkan, 2012, p. 1).  
Economic and Trade Relations Between Turkey and Africa in General 
Turkey located at a location where Europe, Asia, and Africa meet and has generally followed 
a  Western-oriented  foreign  policy  strategy  after  the  Second  World  War.  Examining  the 
surrounding geographies from a Western perspective, Turkey developed a policy with the 
current perspective in Africa until the beginning of the 2000s. This approach has started to 
change since the early 2000s and Turkey has approached African countries with a unique 
perspective.  This  change  enabled  the  political  and  cultural  heritage  to  be  combined  in  a 
strategic policy (Doğan & Tunç, 2015, p. 3).  
As a reflection of the current strategic policy, Turkey's diplomatic relations network, which 
was established through embassies, has shown its effect in the economic and political field over 
the years (Hazar, 2012, p. 6). While Turkish investments were shifted to Africa due to the 
developing economic relations, these relations also contributed to the development of foreign 
trade. For African countries that do not have the necessary physical infrastructure, Turkey's 
53 
 

Daha International University Academic Journal (DIUAJ)               Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022                                                         diuaj.com         
  
investments and aids to the region tend to serve the interests of both parties, unlike Western 
countries.  
In this respect, Turkey differs from Western countries with a colonial past (Karagül & Arslan, 
2013, p. 5). In the last fifteen years, Turkey has developed its commercial and economic union 
with thirty-nine African countries, has invested in twenty-two countries, and abolished the 
double taxation situation by signing agreements with eleven countries. These agreements show 
that the relations between Turkey and Africa are in the process of development (Tepeciklioğlu, 
2012, p. 6).  
Table 1: African Countries with the Most Foreign Trade with Turkey (2000-2018). 
2000  2018 
Country  Amount  (Billion Share  Country  Amount  (Billion Share 
Dollars)  (Percent)  Dollars)  (Percent) 
Algeria  1,575  38,5  Egypt  5,243  24,3 
Morocco  0,142  3,4  Nigeria  0,489  2,2 
Ghana  0,040  0,9  Sudan  0,433  2,0 
South Africa  0,242  5,9  South Africa  1,915  8,9 
Libya  0,881  21,5  Algeria  3,169  14,7 
Egypt  0,515  12,6  Morocco  2,704  12,5 
Nigeria  0,177  4,3  Tunisia  1,086  5,0 
Sudan  0,031  0,7  Senegal  0,401  1,8 
Tunisia  0,226  5,5  Libya  1,865  8,6 
Zimbabwe  0,030  0,7  Ethiopia  0,354  1,6 
Others  0,254  6,2  Others  3,838  17,7 
Total   1,578  100,0  Total  19,822  100,0 
Source: Compiled from TURKSTAT data. 
Table 1 shows African  Countries with the Most Foreign Trade with Turkey (2000-2018).  
Considering the year 2000, the country with the highest foreign trade with Turkey is Algeria 
(38.5%) compared to the whole of Africa, followed by Libya (21.5%). In 2018, Egypt (24.3%) 
was the country with the most foreign trade with Turkey in Africa, followed by Algeria (14.7%). 
Likewise, as seen in Table 1, the trade volume between Turkey and Africa, which was 1.578 
billion dollars in 2000, reached 19.822 billion dollars in 2018, that is, it increased (1156%).  
54 
 

Daha International University Academic Journal (DIUAJ)               Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022                                                         diuaj.com         
  
ECONOMIC  AND  COMMERCIAL  RELATIONS  BETWEEN  TURKEY  AND  THE 
HORN OF AFRICA COUNTRIES 
The Horn of Africa is the easternmost extension of the African continent that includes Ethiopia, 
Somalia, Djibouti, Eritrea and more broadly Kenya, Uganda, Sudan, and South Sudan. This 
region has long been described as one of the most conflicted areas in the world. However, today 
the situation in some countries of the region is improving, countries located in the Horn of 
Africa are engaged in trade, agriculture, livestock, agro-processing, manufacturing, tourism, 
industry, construction, etc. areas with investment opportunities. Turkey is one of the many 
countries that want to take advantage of these opportunities. The search for foreign markets 
has  become  an  important  foreign  trade  policy,  as  the  current  AKP  (The  Justice  and 
Development Party) government plans to break the middle-income trap and become one of the 
higher-income countries.  
Since  the  Horn  of  Africa  countries  were  wholly  or  partially  under  Ottoman  rule,  their 
relationship with Turkey goes back several centuries. After the establishment of the Turkish 
Republic,  Turkey-Africa  relations  generally  remained  at  a  low  level.  In  1998,  Turkey 
developed a new policy called the “Opening to Africa Policy”. This policy formed the basis of 
bilateral relations developed in sub-Saharan Africa. Today, there are embassies of all countries 
in the Horn of Africa in Ankara. This is a symbol of how the relationship between Turkey and 
the Horn of Africa countries developed diplomatically (Ylönen & Záhořík, 2017, p. 5).  
Although  it  is  not  possible  to  compare  Turkey's  economic  ties  in  Africa  in  general,  and 
especially in the Horn of Africa, with the Chinese, it is seen that Turkey follows the path of 
success of the Chinese in its relations with Africans. Unlike China and Western countries, 
Turkey follows a non-interventionist policy that does not interfere with the internal affairs of 
African countries and carries out activities that will benefit the economies of African countries. 
The total trade volume between Ethiopia, Somalia, Eritrea, Djibouti, and Turkey increased 
from 100 million USD in 2004 to over 500 million USD in 2020. With 3.2 billion USD in 
Ethiopia alone, FDI (Foreign Direct Investment) is by far the largest investment in Africa. The 
first  foreign  public  bank  opened  by  Turkey  is  in  the  Horn  of  Africa.  TIKA  (Turkish 
Cooperation and Coordination Agency) and Anadolu Agency have a strong structure in the 
region.  
55 
 

Daha International University Academic Journal (DIUAJ)               Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022                                                         diuaj.com         
  
Somalia Foreign Trade Statistics 
The  Somali  economy  relies  heavily  on  consumption  based  on  imported  goods.  Imports 
represent more than 40 percent of GDP, predominantly financed by remittances, while exports 
represent 10 percent of total GDP. Somalia's trading partners have increased since 2010. The 
major trading partners listed in Tables 6 and 7 represent more than 80 percent of the total value 
and volume of exports and imports to Somalia.  
Table 2: Somalia Foreign Trade Statistics for the Last Ten Years (2011-2020, USD 
Foreign  Trade Foreign  Trade The  ratio  of 
Years Imports  Export 
Volume  Balance  exports to imports 
2011  2,201,762,061 477,240,773 2,679,002,834  -1,724,521,288  21.6 
2012  3,023,954,041 495,358,646 3,519,312,687  -2,528,595,395  16 
2013  3,747,322,791 654,919,168 4,402,241,959  -3,092,403,623  17.4 
2014  3,229,885,449 649,974,385 3,879,859,834  -2,579,911,064  20.0 
2015  3,360,186,573 723,125,922 4,083,312,495  -2,637,060,651  21.5 
2016  3,303,392,534 660,918,250 3,964,310,784  -2,642,474,284  20 
2017  2,892,818,590 451,610,848 3,344,429,438  -2,441,207,742  15.6 
2018  3,170,000,000 675,000,000 3,845,000,000  -2,495,000,000  21.2 
2019  3,700,000,000 525,000,000 4,225,000,000  -3,175,000,000  14.1 
2020  3,915,000,000 694,000,000 4,609,000,000  -3,221,000,000  17.7 
Source: Compiled from UN COMTRADE & IMF DOTS, CBS 2020 data. 
Table 2 shows the trade data for the last decade from 2011 to 2020. According to the figures, 
both exports and imports are increasing. The reason for this is the improvement in the country's 
economy, the end of the political transition, the increasing number of direct investments and 
the increasing number of workers. However, between 2016 and 2017, exports decreased by 9 
percent and 32 percent, respectively, due to the severe drought and rainfall in the last quarter 
of 2016 and the first quarter of 2017. Considering the ratio of exports to imports, this rate was 
20 percent in 2016, it decreased to 15.6 percent in 2017. In 2020, Somalia has a foreign trade 
deficit of more than 3 billion dollars. As a result, livestock prices dropped significantly due to 
drought and rainfall shortages that started in the country in 2016, and shepherds made forced 
sales to cope with the effects of the drought.  
56 
 

|       |               |             | Foreign Trade   | Foreign Trade   | The ratio of       |
|:------|:--------------|:------------|:----------------|:----------------|:-------------------|
| Years | Imports       | Export      |                 |                 |                    |
|       |               |             | Volume          | Balance         | exports to imports |
|       |               |             |                 |                 |                    |
| 2011  | 2,201,762,061 | 477,240,773 | 2,679,002,834   | -1,724,521,288  | 21.6               |
| 2012  | 3,023,954,041 | 495,358,646 | 3,519,312,687   | -2,528,595,395  | 16                 |
| 2013  | 3,747,322,791 | 654,919,168 | 4,402,241,959   | -3,092,403,623  | 17.4               |
| 2014  | 3,229,885,449 | 649,974,385 | 3,879,859,834   | -2,579,911,064  | 20.0               |
| 2015  | 3,360,186,573 | 723,125,922 | 4,083,312,495   | -2,637,060,651  | 21.5               |
| 2016  | 3,303,392,534 | 660,918,250 | 3,964,310,784   | -2,642,474,284  | 20                 |
| 2017  | 2,892,818,590 | 451,610,848 | 3,344,429,438   | -2,441,207,742  | 15.6               |
| 2018  | 3,170,000,000 | 675,000,000 | 3,845,000,000   | -2,495,000,000  | 21.2               |
| 2019  | 3,700,000,000 | 525,000,000 | 4,225,000,000   | -3,175,000,000  | 14.1               |
| 2020  | 3,915,000,000 | 694,000,000 | 4,609,000,000   | -3,221,000,000  | 17.7               |

Daha International University Academic Journal (DIUAJ)               Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022                                                         diuaj.com         
  
Livestock  exports  to  the  Gulf  countries  have  continued  to  be  Somalia's  leading  foreign 
exchange income over time. The lack of diversity in the livestock export market has made the 
country  vulnerable  to  external  shocks  from  epidemics,  resulting  in  a  decline  in  livestock 
exports  (CBS,  2020).  Strong  veterinary  surveillance  and  alternative  feeding  practices  are 
needed to reduce the economy's exposure to shocks from this sector. The ongoing initiative on 
the Drought  
Recovery and Resilience Framework is expected to provide lasting solutions to the repetitive 
and devastating situations that droughts and floods bring to the economy. On the other hand, 
while imports showed an increasing trend from year to year, total imports decreased by 12 
percent in 2017. 
Countries with the Most Foreign Trade of Somalia (2011-2020) 
The  countries  to  which  Somalia  exports  the  most  are  Saudi  Arabia,  Oman,  United  Arab 
Emirates, and Yemen.  
Table 3: Countries to which Somalia Exported Most in the Last Ten Years (2011-2020) 
No  Top Exporting Countries  Percentage of Total Exports 
1.  Saudi Arabia  42% 
2.  Oman  20% 
3.  United Arab Emirates  17% 
4.  Yemen  6% 
5.  India  4% 
6.  Chinese  3% 
7.  France  2% 
8.  Pakistan  1.3% 
9.  Lebanon  1.2% 
10.  Djibouti  1% 
11.  Others  2.5% 
Source: Compiled from UN COMTRADE & IMF DOTS, CBS 2020 data. 
Somalia mainly exports cattle and livestock products to Saudi Arabia, Yemen and Oman, and 
agricultural products, especially vegetables, pearls, precious and semi-precious stones, and 
metals, etc. to the United Arab Emirates. 
57 
 

|   No | Top Exporting Countries   | Percentage of Total Exports   |
|-----:|:--------------------------|:------------------------------|
|    1 | Saudi Arabia              | 42%                           |
|    2 | Oman                      | 20%                           |
|    3 | United Arab Emirates      | 17%                           |
|    4 | Yemen                     | 6%                            |
|    5 | India                     | 4%                            |
|    6 | Chinese                   | 3%                            |
|    7 | France                    | 2%                            |
|    8 | Pakistan                  | 1.3%                          |
|    9 | Lebanon                   | 1.2%                          |
|   10 | Djibouti                  | 1%                            |
|   11 | Others                    | 2.5%                          |

Daha International University Academic Journal (DIUAJ)               Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022                                                         diuaj.com         
  
Table 4: Countries that Somalia imports the most (2011-2020) 
No  Somalia imports the most from  Percentage of Total Imports 
1.  United Arab Emirates  30% 
2.  Ethiopia  12% 
3.  India  9% 
4.  Chinese  7% 
5.  Kenya  6% 
6.  Oman  6% 
7.  Malaysia  2.9% 
8.  Pakistan  2.8% 
9.  Yemen  2.5% 
10.  Turkey  2.5% 
11.  Others  19.3% 
Source: Compiled from UN COMTRADE & IMF DOTS, CBS 2020 data. 
The countries that Somalia imports the most are the United Arab Emirates (30%), Ethiopia 
(12%), India (9%), and China (7%). Kenya and Oman have a share of 6% in Somalia's imports. 
The most imported products by Somalia are raw sugar, rice, palm oil, wheat flour, cars, spare 
parts, clothing and shoes, electronics, and construction materials.  
TURKEY AND SOMALIA TRADE RELATIONS 
The Turkish Embassy in Somalia was opened in 1979, but was closed in 1991 due to the civil 
war that broke out in Somalia. Due to the drought that broke out in Somalia in 2011, Turkey 
provided aid worth 201 million US dollars to many regions most affected by drought, especially 
the capital Mogadishu. The Turkish Embassy in Mogadishu was reopened on 1 November 2011. 
The Turkish Embassy in Mogadishu was one of the first embassies opened in the country after 
the civil war. Today, the relations between the two countries are highly developed and Turkey 
carries out many infrastructure and aid projects in the country with the cooperation of the 
Somali  government.  When  relations  between  the  two  states  resumed  after  20  years,  an 
environment of cooperation was created between the two peoples (Turkish Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, 2021). 
Many Somali businessmen who import goods from Middle Eastern countries, China and some 
African countries now make agreements with companies in Turkey and bring imported goods 
58 
 

|   No | Somalia imports the most from   | Percentage of Total Imports   |
|-----:|:--------------------------------|:------------------------------|
|    1 | United Arab Emirates            | 30%                           |
|    2 | Ethiopia                        | 12%                           |
|    3 | India                           | 9%                            |
|    4 | Chinese                         | 7%                            |
|    5 | Kenya                           | 6%                            |
|    6 | Oman                            | 6%                            |
|    7 | Malaysia                        | 2.9%                          |
|    8 | Pakistan                        | 2.8%                          |
|    9 | Yemen                           | 2.5%                          |
|   10 | Turkey                          | 2.5%                          |
|   11 | Others                          | 19.3%                         |

Daha International University Academic Journal (DIUAJ)               Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022                                                         diuaj.com         
  
from Turkey. Many businessmen living abroad and originally from Somalia came to Turkey to 
buy real estate, while at the same time establishing foreign trade relations with companies in 
Turkey, they exported Turkish goods abroad. Many Turkish companies found the opportunity 
to increase their exports to Somalia when the trade door between Somalia and Turkey was 
opened. It has been observed that there has been an increase of up to 80 percent in the exports 
of Turkish companies to Somalia in the last 10 years (TC Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2021).  
On the other hand, the exports of Somali companies to Turkey have not increased much in the 
last 10 years, and when the increase in their exports is considered, it is seen that this increase 
is only 30 percent. The reason for this is that Somalia has not yet become a fully reliable country. 
Despite security concerns, the trade volume between the two countries has grown steadily over 
the last 10 years. When the security problems disappear in the future, the foreign trade volume 
between the two countries is expected to increase rapidly (TC Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 
2021). 
Main Products Subject to Foreign Trade Between Turkey and Somalia 
The main products that  Turkey exports to Somalia are; pastas  and couscous, wheat  flour, 
sunflower  and  cotton  seeds,  dried  legumes,  and  drugs  prepared  for  use  in  treatment  (TC 
Ministry of Commerce, 2021).  
Table 5: Main Products Exported by Turkey to Somalia 
1. Pastas and couscous 
2. construction iron 
3. Wheat flour 
4. Cottonseed oils, safflower, sunflower, and their fractions (not chemically modified) 
5. Medicines prepared for use in treatment or prevention (dose) 
6. Tampons and sanitary towels, similar sanitary articles, and diapers 
7. prefabricated buildings 
8. Other furniture and parts thereof 
9. Bulldozers, mechanical ploughs, excavators, road rollers, graders, soil levellers, scrapers, 
etc. 
10. Tatlı biskuvi ve Gofretler  
11. Sheet, bar, or iron, etc., of steel prepared for use in construction. 
12. Reagents used in laboratories, diagnostics 
59 
 

| 1. Pastas and couscous                                                                          |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2. construction iron                                                                            |
| 3. Wheat flour                                                                                  |
| 4. Cottonseed oils, safflower, sunflower, and their fractions (not chemically modified)         |
| 5. Medicines prepared for use in treatment or prevention (dose)                                 |
| 6. Tampons and sanitary towels, similar sanitary articles, and diapers                          |
| 7. prefabricated buildings                                                                      |
| 8. Other furniture and parts thereof                                                            |
| 9. Bulldozers, mechanical ploughs, excavators, road rollers, graders, soil levellers, scrapers, |
| etc.                                                                                            |
| 10. Tatlı biskuvi ve Gofretler                                                                  |
| 11. Sheet, bar, or iron, etc., of steel prepared for use in construction.                       |
| 12. Reagents used in laboratories, diagnostics                                                  |

Daha International University Academic Journal (DIUAJ)               Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022                                                         diuaj.com         
  
13. Motor vehicles for the transport of goods 
14. Soil,  metal  ore,  stone,  etc.  Sorting,  sorting,  sifting,  burning,  separating,  grinding, 
crushing, kneading, moulding etc. machines. 
Source: trademap 
In addition, rebar, prefabricated structures, furniture and its parts, bulldozers, mechanical plows, 
excavators, road rollers, graders, soil levellers, scrapers, steel sheet, bar, or iron, etc. prepared 
for use in construction. materials, motor vehicles for the transport of goods, soil, metal ore, 
stone, etc. sorting, sieving, burning, separating, grinding, crushing, kneading, moulding etc. 
machines are among the main products exported from Turkey to Somalia. 
The products imported by Turkey from Somalia are; Lacquers are natural gums, resins, other 
oil seeds and fruits, metal extraction, essential oils, oil resins obtained by extraction and terpene 
by-products. These products are given in detail in Table 6.  
Table 6: Main Products Imported by Turkey from Somalia 
1  Other oilseeds and fruits 
2  Lacquer natural gums, resins and oil resins and gum resins (such as rosewood) 
3  Raw hides and skins of equine animals and cattle (including buffalo) 
4  Essential oils, extracted oil resins, resinoids and terpene by-products, solutions 
Kaynak: trademap 
 Trade between Turkey and Somalia has gradually increased in the last 10 years. Turkey is the 
party with foreign trade surplus in bilateral trade. In Table 7, the last 10-year period between 
2011-2020 shows the size of the trade between the two countries. 
Table 7: Turkey's Foreign Trade with Somalia (Between 2011-2020-USD) 
Foreign  trade Foreign  trade The  ratio  of exports 
Years Export  Imports 
balance  volume  to imports (%) 
2011  39.547.534  2.464.966  37.082.568  42.012.500  1.600 
2012  43.751.202  1.163.423  42.587.779  44.914.625  3.762 
2013  58.314.799  1.051.799  57.263.000  59.366.598  5.548 
2014  62.119.434  1.522.895  60.596.539  63.642.329  4.081 
 2015 71.034.857  1.343.361  69.691.496  72.378.218  5.289 
2016  115.886.628  2.156.056  113.730.572  118.042.684  5.375 
60 
 

|                                                                                            |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 13. Motor vehicles for the transport of goods                                              |
| 14. Soil, metal ore, stone, etc. Sorting, sorting, sifting, burning, separating, grinding, |
| crushing, kneading, moulding etc. machines.                                                |

|   1 | Other oilseeds and fruits                                                          |
|----:|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|   2 | Lacquer natural gums, resins and oil resins and gum resins (such as rosewood)      |
|   3 | Raw hides and skins of equine animals and cattle (including buffalo)               |
|   4 | Essential oils, extracted oil resins, resinoids and terpene by-products, solutions |

|       |             |           | Foreign trade   | Foreign trade   | The ratio of exports   |
|:------|:------------|:----------|:----------------|:----------------|:-----------------------|
| Years | Export      | Imports   |                 |                 |                        |
|       |             |           | balance         | volume          | to imports (%)         |
|       |             |           |                 |                 |                        |
| 2011  | 39.547.534  | 2.464.966 | 37.082.568      | 42.012.500      | 1.600                  |
| 2012  | 43.751.202  | 1.163.423 | 42.587.779      | 44.914.625      | 3.762                  |
| 2013  | 58.314.799  | 1.051.799 | 57.263.000      | 59.366.598      | 5.548                  |
| 2014  | 62.119.434  | 1.522.895 | 60.596.539      | 63.642.329      | 4.081                  |
| 2015  | 71.034.857  | 1.343.361 | 69.691.496      | 72.378.218      | 5.289                  |
| 2016  | 115.886.628 | 2.156.056 | 113.730.572     | 118.042.684     | 5.375                  |

Daha International University Academic Journal (DIUAJ)               Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022                                                         diuaj.com         
  
2017  142.945.971  1.030.152  141.915.819  143.976.123  13.878 
2018  181.368.808  5.842.264  175.526.544  187.211.072  3.104 
2019  244.420.999  6.398.589  238.022.410  250.819.588  3.820 
2020  266.142.490  4.802.387  261.340.103  270.944.877  5.542 
 Source: Compiled from Turkish Statistical Institute-TurkStat (2021) data. 
Trade between Turkey and Somalia has gradually increased in the last 10 years. Turkey is the 
party with foreign trade surplus in bilateral trade. In the last ten years, Turkey's exports to 
Somalia increased from USD 39,547,534 in 2011 to USD 266,142,490 in 2020, showing an 
approximately 8-fold increase. Somalia's exports to Turkey, on the other hand, increased from 
2,464,966 USD in 2011 to 4,802,387 USD in 2020, thus nearly doubling in a 10-year period. 
As  can  be  seen,  Turkey's  exports  have  increased  both  in  quantity  and  value  compared  to 
Somalia, and have increased 4 times more in 10 years. 
Foreign trade volume of 42 million dollars in 2011; it reached $44 million in 2012. Foreign 
trade volume, which was 72 million dollars in 2015, exceeded 100 million dollars in 2016 and 
reached 118 million dollars. In 2017, it increased by 21% compared to 2016 and reached the 
level of 143 million dollars. Most recently, the bilateral trade volume between Somalia and 
Turkey was 270 million USD in 2020 (imports: 4 million USD; exports: 266 million USD 
(Turkish  Statistical  Institute-TurkStat).  Products  that  have  an  important  place  in  Turkey's 
exports to Somalia are pasta, sugar, prefabricated structures, medical devices, motor vehicles 
and  medicines.  Various  animal  skins  and  leather  travel  goods  have  an  important  place  in 
Turkey's import from Somalia. 
CONCLUSION AND EVALUATION 
Turkey stands out as a rising power in Africa's development story. The fact that Turkey does 
not have a colonial past on the continent distinguishes it from other powers, and in this way, 
its relationship with African countries also contributes positively to its image. One of the most 
concrete indicators of the strengthening Turkey-Africa relations is the developing economic 
relations and the exponentially increasing trade figures.  
While Turkey's total trade volume with Africa was 5.4 billion USD in 2003, it increased to 
25.3  billion  USD  in  2020.  The  trade  volume  between  Turkey  and  Sub-Saharan  African 
countries, on the other hand, was 1.35 billion USD in 2003 and reached 10 billion USD in 2020. 
61 
 

|      | None        | None      | None        | None        |   None |
|-----:|:------------|:----------|:------------|:------------|-------:|
| 2017 | 142.945.971 | 1.030.152 | 141.915.819 | 143.976.123 | 13.878 |
| 2018 | 181.368.808 | 5.842.264 | 175.526.544 | 187.211.072 |  3.104 |
| 2019 | 244.420.999 | 6.398.589 | 238.022.410 | 250.819.588 |  3.82  |
| 2020 | 266.142.490 | 4.802.387 | 261.340.103 | 270.944.877 |  5.542 |

Daha International University Academic Journal (DIUAJ)               Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022                                                         diuaj.com         
  
On the other hand, commercial relations between Turkey and Somalia have increased rapidly 
in the last ten years and have made significant progress. In the trade between Turkey and 
Somalia, Turkey is the country with a foreign trade surplus. The foreign trade volume between 
the two countries, which was 42 million dollars in 2011, it reached approximately $45 million 
in 2012. Foreign trade volume, which was 72 million dollars in 2015, exceeded 100 million 
dollars in 2016 and reached 118 million dollars. In 2017, it increased by 21% compared to 2016 
and reached 143.7 million dollars.  
Most recently, the bilateral trade volume between Somalia and Turkey was approximately 271 
million USD in 2020 (Turkey's exports to Somalia were more than 266 million USD, while 
Somalia's exports to Turkey were approximately 5 million USD in the same year). As a result 
of the development of commercial relations between the two countries, many Somali foreign 
trade companies that import goods from some Arab countries, African countries, and China 
have started to import goods from Turkey. Today, it is seen that the market for Turkish goods 
has  expanded  in  many  sectors  in  Somalia.  Thus,  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in 
Turkey's exports to Somalia. 
On the other hand, Somalia's exports to Turkey did not increase much. The biggest reason for 
this is the lack of confidence in the country. Another reason is that the economic situation of 
Somalia is generally based on agriculture and animal husbandry and export products are very 
limited. In addition, the very insufficient level of industrialization is one of the other effective 
reasons. As a result of the establishment of an environment of trust in the country, it is expected 
that  Turkish  investments  will  increase  and  the  trade  between  the  two  countries  will  gain 
momentum.  
REFERENCES 
Anyanwu, J. C. (2006). Promoting of investment in Africa. African development review, 18(1), 42-71. 
Carmody,  P.  R.,  &  Owusu,  F.  Y.  (2007).  Competing  hegemons?  Chinese  versus  American  geo-economic 
strategies in Africa. Political Geography, 26(5), 504-524. 
Doğan, B. B. ve Tunç, Ş. Ö. (2015). Determinants of Turkey's Foreign Trade with African Countries: Panel gravity 
Model Approach. Journal of Academic Research and Studies (AKAD), 7 (12), 1-17. Türkiye’nin Afrika 
Ülkeleri İle Olan Dış Ticaretinin Belirleyicileri: Panel Çekim Modeli Yaklaşımı. Akademik Araştırmalar 
ve Çalışmalar Dergisi (AKAD), 7 (12), 1-17.  
Ferhavi,  F.  (2013a).  Global  Competition  and  Financial  Crisis  in  Africa.  International  Strategic  Research 
Organization  (USAK).  Afrika'da  Küresel  Rekabet  ve  Mali  Kriz.  International  Strategic  Research 
Organization (USAK).  
Ferhavi, F. (2013b). French Foreign Policy in the Middle East and Africa. International Strategic Research 
Organization (USAK). Ortadoğu ve Afrika’da Fransız Dış Politikası. International Strategic Research 
Organization (USAK).  
62 
 

| Carmody, P. R., & Owusu, F. Y. (2007). Competing hegemons? Chinese versus American geo-economic   |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| strategies in Africa. Political Geography, 26(5), 504-524.                                        |

Daha International University Academic Journal (DIUAJ)               Vol. 1, No. 1, 2022                                                         diuaj.com         
  
Hazar,  N.  (2011).  Africa  and  Turkey-Africa  relations  in  the  Globalization  Process.  International  Strategic 
Research Organization (USAK) (Vol. 2). Küreselleşme Sürecinde Afrika ve Türkiye-frika ilişkileri. 
International Strategic Research Organization (USAK) (Vol. 2).  
Hazar, N. (2012). Turkey in Africa: Implementation and Evaluation of the Action Plan Fifteen Years Later. Middle 
Eastern Analysis, 4(46). Türkiye Afrika'da: Eylem Planının Uygulanması ve Deǵerlendirme on Beş Yıl 
Sonra. Middle Eastern Analysis/Ortadogu Analiz, 4(46).  
https://centralbank.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/Summary-of-Trade-Statistics-2010-2018   
https://centralbank.gov.so/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/Summary-of-Trade-Statistics-2010-2018-updated.pdf 
https://ticaret.gov.tr/data/5b885d7baf23be7c5c10c692/Somali%20%c3%9clke%20Profili.pdf  
 https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/analiz-haber/afrikada-cin-in-yukselisi-ve-stratejik-hedefleri/1240987    (Erişim  Tarihi: 
09/06/2021)  
https://www.aa.com.tr/tr/dunya/somali-ekonomik-kalkinma-bakani-muhammed-turk-yatirimcilara-tesekkur-
etti/2070841 (Erişim Tarihi: 05/06/2021) 
https://www.hurriyet.com.tr/ekonomi/somali-turkiye-ile-ayaga-kalkiyor-41070433 
https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2020/03/25/pr20104-somalia-somalia-to-receive-debt-relief-
under-the-enhanced-hipc-initiative  
https://www.mfa.gov.tr/relations-between-turkey-and-somalia.en.mfa 
https://www.milliyet.com.tr/yerel-haberler/ankara/akdag-somali-ile-mevcut-ekonomik-ve-ticari-iliskilerimizi-
daha-yuksek-seviyelere-cikartmayi-hedefliyoruz-12526559  https://www.sondakika.com/haber/haber-
turkiye-ile-somali-arasinda-ekonomik-is-birligi-10446380/   
https://www.trade.gov.tr/statistics/foreign-trade-statistics/monthly-foreign-trade-statistics-tables-july-2022 
https://www.trademap.org/Index.aspx 
KARAGÜL, S., & ARSLAN, İ. (2014). Continental Approach to Peace and Security Building in Africa: African 
Architecture of Peace and Security. Security Strategies Journal, 10(19).  
Kızılarslan, A. G. (2009). Economic Relations Between Turkey and African Countries. Turkish and African Civil 
Society Organizations, 19-27.  
Özkan, M. (2012). Turkey's Increasing Role in Africa: Practical Efforts and Discourse Quests. Middle Eastern 
Analysis, 4(46). Türkiye'nin Afrika'da Artan Rolü: Pratik Çabalar ve Söylem Arayışları. Middle Eastern 
Analysis/Ortadoğu Analiz, 4(46).  
Roux, J., (2013). Ceratocystis species on the African continent, with particular reference to C. albifundus, an 
African species in the C. fimbriatasensu lato species complex. CBS Biodiversity Series, 12, 131-138. 
Sayre, A. P. (1999). Africa (Vol. 8). Twenty-First Century Books.  
Tepeciklioğlu, E. E. (2012). The Increasing Importance of the African Continent in World Politics and Turkey-
Africa Relations. Ankara University, Journal of African Studies, Vol: 1, Issue: 2, Spring: 2012. Afrika 
Kıtasının Dünya Politikasında Artan Önemi Ve Türkiye-Afrika İlişkileri. Ankara Üniversitesi, Afrika 
Çalışmaları Dergisi, Cilt: 1, Sayı: 2, Bahar: 2012. 
Tucker,  C.  J.,  Townshend,  J.  R.,  &  Goff,  T.  E.  (1985).  African  land-cover  classification  using  satellite 
data. Science, 227(4685), 369-375. 
Ylönen, A., ve Záhořík, J. (Eds.). (2017). The Horn of Africa Since the 1960s: Local and International Politics 
Intertwined. Taylor & Francis.  
 
 
63 
 

| Tucker, C. J., Townshend, J. R., & Goff, T. E. (1985). African land-cover classification using satellite   |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| data. Science, 227(4685), 369-375.                                                                         |