Ultra-Reliable Communication in
5G Wireless Systems
Petar Popovski
Department of Electronic Systems, Aalborg University
Email: petarp@es.aau.dk
Abstract—Wireless 5G systems will not only be “4G, but data 
rate 
faster”. One of the novel features discussed in relation to 5G
is Ultra-Reliable Communication (URC), an operation mode not
4102 tcO 61  ]TI.sc[  1v0334.0141:viXra Gbps  R5:  
present in today’s wireless systems. URC refers to provision of R2: Extreme broadband  Physically  
certain level of communication service almost 100 % of the time. impossible 
Example URC applications include reliable cloud connectivity,
Mbps 
critical connections for industrial automation and reliable wire- R1: Ultra-reliable  
moderate data rates  
less coordination among vehicles. This paper puts forward a
systematic view on URC in 5G wireless systems. It starts by
kbps 
analyzing the fundamental mechanisms that constitute a wireless R3: Massive  
connection and concludes that one of the key steps towards R4: Ultra-reliable  M2M  
enabling URC is revision of the methods for encoding control and ultra-low  communication 
bps 
latency 
information (metadata) and data. It introduces the key concept of
Reliable Service Composition, where a service is designed to adapt 1  10  100  1000  10000  100000  # users 
its requirements to the level of reliability that can be attained. The
problem of URC is analyzed across two different dimensions. The
Fig. 1. Operating regions of the 5G wireless systems.
first dimension is the type of URC problem that is defined based
on the time frame used to measure the reliability of the packet
transmission. Two types of URC problems are identified: long-
is dominated by cellular technologies for wide-area use, such
term URC (URC-L) and short-term URC (URC-S). The second
as 4G LTE (Long Term Evolution) and local high-speed use,
dimension is represented by the type of reliability impairment that
can affect the communication reliability in a given scenario. The such as Wi-Fi. These systems operate in the region R1, whose
main objective of this paper is to create the context for defining shape outlines that the data rate of each user decreases as the
and solving the new engineering problems posed by URC in 5G.
user population increases. Clearly, 5G wireless will support
the same operating region; however, the rates of R1 will be
rather moderate in the context of 5G, considering that there
I. INTRODUCTION
will be also extreme data rates, see region R2. However,
A. 5G Wireless and its Operating Regions
differently from today’s systems, the rates in R1 in 5G will
Cellular wireless systems from 2G to todays 4G have been be, for some services, supported in an ultra-reliable manner.
evolving towards offering the users connectivity at increasingly For example, the data rate of 50 Mbps will be offered with
higher data rates. While this trend is expected to continue in very high reliability (> 99%) or strict latency guarantees,
the fifth generation (5G) wireless systems, there are strong which is not the case today. The region R2 features extreme
indications [1], [2] that 5G will not only be “4G, but faster”, broadband rates and it is very often mistakenly referred to
but will also feature at least two new operating modes: as “the 5G wireless” due to the very active research agenda
that contributes to this region, including: 60 GHz spectrum
Ultra-Reliable Communication (URC): This is an opera-
•
use, massive MIMO, full duplex wireless, etc. Contrary to
tion mode not present in today’s cellular wireless systems
the broadband regime, the region R3 and most of R4 feature
and refers to provision of certain level of communication
lowband1 data rates. In lowband communication, the messages
service almost 100 % of the time.
sent from/to the devices are short. In the region R3, these short
Massive M2M (Machine-to-Machine) Communication
•
messages are coming from a large number of machines/sensors
(MMC): This mode already emerges as an extension of
in e.g. the smart grid or environmental sensing. In the region
the 4G LTE systems and refers to support of a massive
R4 the short messages are exchanged with very low latency,
number (tens of thousands) machines in a given area.
as in e.g. traffic-safety-related communication among vehicles
Fig. 1 illustrates the expected operating regions of 5G
or critical industrial control. The operation in R5 is impossible
wireless systems defined in the context of the data rate vs. the
due to fundamental physical and information-theoretic limits.
number of connected devices in a service area. The numbers
are not precise and only depict the order of magnitude. At
1We are not using the obvious term narrowband as it would refer to the
present, the large and diverse ecosystem of wireless systems data rates of the digital systems in the beginning of 90s.

| R5:                                | None          |
| R2: Extreme broadband Physically   |               |
| impossible                         |               |
| R1: Ultra-reliable                 |               |
| moderate data rates                |               |
| R3: Massive                        |               |
| R4: Ultra-reliable M2M             |               |
| and ultra-low communication        |               |
| latency                            |               |
|:-----------------------------------|:--------------|
|                                    | impossible    |
|                                    | R3: Massive   |
|                                    | M2M           |
|                                    | communication |

B. What is URC? Motivating Examples. is willing to guarantee a data rate to an individual device
> 99% of the time. However, once the ultra-reliable feature
Despite the large proliferation, commercial wireless tech-
is available, then one can talk about wireless as a commodity
nologies have not attained the stage in which connectivity
that is truly available “anywhere and anytime” and it is hard
is guaranteed almost 100% of the time. The reason is that
to foresee all the applications that will be built assuming the
the commercial wireless technologies are designed to offer
existence of such wireless links.
relatively good connectivity most of the time, but offer almost
zero data rate in areas with poor coverage, under excessive II. ELEMENTS OF ULTRA-RELIABLE COMMUNICATION
interference or when the network resources are overloaded. On
A. Anatomy of a Digital Data Connection
the other hand, wireless technology continues to enter into new
In order to understand the design needs for URC, we
application areas and an increasing number of services will
need to go back to the fundamental constituents of a digital
start to depend critically on the availability of wireless links
data connection. Assume that Alice wants to send data to
that offer at least minimal communication quality. The term
Bob over a Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel
“commercial” is emphasized to differentiate from wireless sys-
with bandwidth W and SNR of γ. The classical result in
tems used by the military or law enforcement agencies, where
information theory states that the maximal data rate at which
URC is achieved under a completely different set of techno-
Alice can send to Bob is the channel capacity [4]:
economic constraints and dedicated spectrum allocation.
Referring to Fig. 1, URC is relevant for more than one C(W,γ) = W log (1 + γ) [bps] (1)
2
region, as illustrated by the following examples.
The practical interpretation is that one needs to send a very
Reliable cloud connectivity. All cloud-based services as-
•
large volume of data over a very large number of symbols in
sume that Internet connectivity is available during the
order to use the data rate given by (1) and guarantee that Bob
large percentage of the time. For mobile devices, as
decodes the data with almost zero probability of error.
the wireless connectivity becomes more available and
However, what is rarely discussed in relation to (1) is the
reliable, the cloud services will be reshaped in order to
role of the control data or the metadata that is a pre-condition
rely even more on the wireless connection. One could ask,
to carry any data communication. In order to see the impact of
for example: how to design a cloud application knowing
the metadata, let us assume that Alice transmits to Bob using
that 99.9 % of the time there is at least 1 Mbps available
n channel uses. A channel use is the smallest, atomic unit of
and 99 % of the time there is at least 50 Mbps available?
communication that can be sent from the transmitter to the
The reliability can also refer to guaranteed low latency
receiver. Let one channel use take T seconds. In AWGN, a
s
for transferring a message of a given size, which is an
channel use is represented by a complex baseband symbol to
enabler of the “Tactile Internet” [3]. This type of URC is
which a complex Gaussian noise is added when arriving at the
featured in the region R1.
receiver. Achieving the capacity in (1) requires that one single
Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) wireless coordination. In a futur-
•
codeword spreads over infinitely many channel uses. However,
istic scenario, the cars will be wirelessly interconnected
for all practical purposes it can be assumed that the formula is
in a very reliable way, such that there is no need to use
valid when n is very large, with a remark that the probability
traffic lights at a crossing, the cars will coordinate through
of error is p , a value close to zero such that instead of
e,d
short wireless messages. Enabling such a high reliability
capacity, we can speak of a throughput C(W,γ)(1 − p ).
e,d
requires fundamentally new transmission techniques and
The total amount of data sent by Alice during the n channel
access protools for sending short wireless messages. This
uses is D, then the relationship is
type of URC is illustrative for the region R4.
Alarm from a massive set of sensors 5G wireless will en- D = n · T · C(W,γ) [bits] (2)
• s
able deployment of large-scale distributed cyber-physical
The formula (1) assumes that Bob is in a state where he knows
systems for e.g. smart grid or industrial control. These
he receives data from Alice. To achieve this state, Alice uses
require lowband communications and most of the time the
m channel uses preceding the n data channel uses to send
short messages are of low importance or redundant (e.g.
metadata, also called header. The header is a short packet
sensor reporting correlated measurements). However, in
that has its own integrity (CRC) check and carries H bits of
some cases there can be a critical event (e.g. a protective
data. It is usually H (cid:28) D and the data rate R of the header
H
relay in smart grid) that needs to be reported with very
is chosen to be very low, since the reception of the header is
high reliability. The challenge is how to support critical
a condition to receive the data. Let R be chosen such that
H
operation that coexists with the usual lowband traffic.
the probability of error in receiving the header is p . The
e,h
This type of URC is situated in region R3 of Fig. 1.
effective goodput from Alice to Bob achieved is:
These three examples reflect today’s perspective on wireless
D
services and are therefore limited in depicting the scope of G = (1 − p )(1 − p ) [bps] (3)
AB e,h e,d
(m + n)T
URC. Already in 3G there were claims for connectivity “any- s
where and anytime”; nevertheless, it is hard to perceive this Here (1−p )(1−p ) is the probability that Bob receives the
e,h e,d
claim beyond its marketing value, since no cellular operator data correctly, since it is mandatory that at first he receives the

header. Note that we have not included the requirement that mation about the speaker. The metadata is sent continuously as
Bob sends backs ACK message to Alice and she receives it the analog voice contains biometric features that identify the
correctly; that would only further decrease the throughput. speaker. It can be concluded that the robustness of the analog
The high-speed wireless systems, such as LTE, put a major voice communication is rooted in the fact of joint encoding
focus on how to efficiently transmit large data volume i.e. of metadata and data instead of sending the metadata only at
D (cid:29) H and n (cid:29) m. In that case the following two features the beginning and then supplement it with data.
can be used: (1) large data means that one can use methods The main message of this discussion is that URC requires
(codes, modulation) that are almost capacity-achieving. (2) the reconsideration of the traditional ways that are used to send
size of metadata is small compared to the size of data, such metadata and data. New transmission methods should consider
that even if the metadata is sent suboptimally (e. g. repetition fully or partially joint encoding of data and metadata, along
coding and very low R ), its overall effect on the system with the optimization of the associated tradeoffs, notably the
H
performance is negligible. Since H (cid:28) D, then even with tradeoff between energy efficiency and reliability.
very low rate R , the value of m can be neglected within
H
B. Reliable Service Composition
the goodput expression (3). The low value of R is used to
H
guarantee that p (cid:28) p , such that (1 − p ) ≈ 1 in (3). Our working definition of reliability is:
e,h e,d e,h
In URC, the objective is to make (1 − p )(1 − p ) very Definition 1: Reliability is the probability that a certain
e,h e,d
high and thus satisfy the high reliability levels. One idea could amount of data from one peer is successfully transmitted to
be that we do not use inefficient decoding for the header and another peer within a given deadline or time frame.
instead combine the header and the data in a single packet and Ultimately, a communication system should support reliable
encode them efficiently. This would be a packet that spans transfer of data for a service/application that resides in the
over n + m channel uses and with probability of error q higher protocol layers. All the other procedures are only aux-
e,d
where (1 − q ) > (1 − p )(1 − p ). The problem with iliary building blocks to support the main goal. The reliability
e,d e,h e,d
such a transmission is that Bob needs to know a priori that he requirements (latency, data rate, error probability) at the higher
should decode the transmission. To see this, consider the case layers can, in principle, be translated into reliability require-
where there are two possible receivers of Alice’s message, Bob ments to each of the lower layers. However, this is putting
and Carol and Alice sends a packet to Bob. If the data and conservative requirements to the lower layers, as the following
metadata are jointly encoded, then both Bob and Carol must example shows. Consider a cloud computing service, where
decode everything and only after decoding, Bob decides to the requirement is that the user has the perception that the
accept the data for himself, while Carol drops it. Clearly, for computing/memory resources are local and this is translated
Carol this is not efficient in terms of energy, but it is the price into latency requirement of e.g. 0.5 seconds. However, this
to be paid to have an improved transmission reliability. This number does not specify the amount of data transferred during
type of metadata/data encoding is an example of the tradeoff that time, such that one needs to account for the highest
between energy efficiency and very high reliability. amount of data possible. However, adjusting the system only
Separate encoding of header and data becomes even worse to the highest data volume will lead to prohibitively high rate
when the data packets are short, such that metadata and data requirements that are very difficult to satisfy: Either the system
are roughly of the same size, H ≈ D. In that case m has to pre-reserve resources that are idle most of the time or
becomes comparable to n, even larger if the coding for the the service needs to accept certain degradation compared to
header is done in an inefficient way in order to increase the what had been originally requested. The second option is a
robustness. As a result, the goodput in (3) decreases. In this viable solution to keep high system efficiency while providing
situation the joint encoding of metadata and data becomes a high level of reliability.
even more relevant, since the overall data size that needs to A reliability requirement, such as “transfer of data packets
be encoded increases to H +D. The recent fundamental work that have at most B bytes with a delay D less than L seconds
on rates/error probabilities for finite block length [5] indicates in 99% of the attempts” creates a rather simple criterion to see
that with packets of short size, say with H = 80 and D = 128 whether the system meets the requirement or not. However, it
it is more efficient to encode a data block of size H+D = 208 is important to ask Does the service need to fail whenever
bits. the reliability requirement is not met? In order to answer no
We make a slight digression to relate our discussion of to this question, we need to reconsider the way in which a
data-metadata encoding to the case of analog communication certain communication service is composed. Reliable service
systems. Why is analog voice communication considered to composition (RSC) is a way to specify different versions of
be very robust and treated as the “last resort” in many a service, such that when the communication conditions are
critical systems, such as airplane or military? Analog voice worsened, the Quality of Experience(QoE) gracefully degrades
communication is inherently suitable for graceful degradation: to the service version that can be reliably supported, instead of
as the communication conditions worsens the voice quality having a binary decision “service available/not available”. The
decreases, but is still comprehensible. To interpret in terms of concept of graceful degradation of a service is not new, see
data and metadata, one can say that the data is the content of for example scalable video coding [6]. However, video and its
the speech that is transmitted, while the metadata is the infor- perception naturally allows for graceful degradation; in RSC,

 etar
basic mode 
99.999% 
1 Gbps 
enhanced mode 99%  500 Mbps  95% 
100 Mbps 
full mode 97% 
50 Mbps 
Fig. 2. Illustration of the Reliable Service Composition (RSC). 10 Mbps 
99 % 
5 Mbps 
the objective is to design services that offer certain level of
functionality when it is not possible to get the full one.
1  5  10  50  100  500  1000  #users 
Fig. 2 depicts the main idea behind RSC (the percentages
are only provisional). Let us consider RSC in the case of Fig. 3. Illustrative graph for URC-L where the average rate is depicted as a
function of the number of users that share resources.
Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V) communication. The basic version
of the service is available 99.999 % of the time. In the
V2V setting, the basic version could involve transmission of A. URC over a Long Term (URC-L)
a small set of warning/safety messages without certification.
The general problem in URC-L is how to guarantee rates,
The fact that the set of messages transferable in the basic
with high probability, to one or multiple users over longer pe-
mode is limited can be used to design efficient low-rate
riods. For example, in reliable cloud connectivity, an operator
mechanisms to transfer those messages. An enhanced version
would like to guarantee to the user a certain connectivity level
of the service is available 99 % of the time, includes limited
within a given coverage area. Here we define the coverage
certification and guarantees for transfer of payload of size
area as the area in which a user is able to receive control
D within time T with probability 99.9 %. The full version
1 1 information from the infrastructure during 99 % of the time.
is available 97 % of the time, includes full certification and
We provide two illustrative examples of target performance
guarantees for transfer of payload of size D > D within time
2 1 requirements for URC-L:
T < T with probability 99.9 %. The key issue in making
2 1
When the user has a dedicated communication resource,
•
RSC operational is to have reliable criteria to detect in which
then in the coverage area he should be offered at least
version the system should apply at a given time. The design
500 Mbps during 95 % of the time and at least 50 Mbps
of data/metadata for each service version should be integrated
during 99 % of the time.
in an overall protocol that can flexibly switch between modes
When the user needs to share the resources with multiple
•
as the dynamic conditions dictate.
users, then the target performance is depicted on Fig. 3.
III. TYPES OF URC PROBLEMS In both cases the average rate is calculated over a time window
T larger than 10 ms, for example T = 1 second. Fig. 3
The variability of the requirements across the three URC W W
suggests that, as long as the number of users is up to 50,
examples in Section I-B, indicates that there are different
then we can put forward the requirements for user with a
classes of URC problems. In this section we use the latency
dedicated resource. As the number of users grows beyond 50
parameter as a dimension across which we identify two
and becomes massive, then less resources remain for each user
different types of URC problems:
and the rate should degrade gracefully.
URC over a long term (URC-L): This type of URC deals
•
Supporting URC-L can rely on using known techniques, but
with problems that require minimal rate over a longer
optimized in a new setup and new target performance figures.
period (> 10 ms), such as minimal rate for a connection
For example, Massive MIMO [8] is an emerging technology
to a public cloud in a densely populated area, etc.
that is a good candidate to support the requirements of URC-L.
URC in a short term (URC-S): Problems with very strin-
•
Massive MIMO operates with many spatial degrees of freedom
gent latency requirements (≤ 10 ms), such as vehicles
and it could be used either to achieve extremely high reliability
communicating at a crossroad, teleprotection in smart
in supporting a given user (the first requirement above) or
grid, etc.
efficiently multiplex many users (Fig. 3).
The 10 ms value comes from the METIS project [7]. It should
B. URC over a Short Term (URC-S)
be noted that a specific class of URC for emergency commu-
nications falls under the umbrella of URC-L. The objective In the case of URC-S, the focus is on how to deliver a cer-
in URC for emergency is to provide minimal connectivity tain portion of data under a very stringent latency requirement.
when the infrastructure is damaged or non-existent. It does Similar to URC-L, here we could also consider the latency
involve aspects of radio access, which is the main theme in this for a single user that has dedicated resources or multiple
paper, but it also involves techniques from ad hoc networking, users that need to satisfy latency requirements by sharing
delay-tolerant networking and self-healing, which reside in the the resources. When there are multiple users, a significant
higher layer of the protocol stack and are outside the scope of part of the latency budget may be consumed due to the
this paper. competition among the users (e.g. collisions in ALOHA-like

 ycnetal complex AWGN, one can find that n = N = 128. We now
min
99.9% 
95%  have to convert this number into a latency figure. However, a
channel use is a generic degree of freedom that can carry
< 10 ms 
information. Let the required latency in which this reliability
< 8 ms  needs to be attained is T. Having N and T, we can now
try to determine how large bandwidth the link needs to use.
< 6 ms 
99.9%, RSC  The number of degrees of freedom that are available in a time-
frequency window that spans T seconds and W [Hz] is 2WT,
< 4 ms 
such that we find the required bandwidth to be:
< 2 ms 
N
W = (5)
1  5  10  50  100  500  1000 
 etar 2T
#users 
Clearly, in order to use the formula (4), we need to assume
that each channel use in the time-frequency grid represents
Fig. 4. Illustrative performance requirements for URC-S where the latency
is depicted as a function of the number of users. an identical Gaussian channel with γ = 0 [dB]. Nevertheless,
our discussion above is an illustration how the finite block
length results can lead to latency-constrained transmission
protocols). An illustration of the target latency requirements
techniques. We also note that when the bandwidth is limited
with multiple competing users is given on Fig. 4. The full lines
to be W < N , then the required channel uses cannot be
depict possible requirements for the performance in terms of max 2T
obtained in frequency and a possible solution is to e.g. use
latency/reliability when the service requirements are fixed and
spatial (MIMO) degrees of freedom.
the messages have size of at most D bits. If the service is
Recalling the discussion of the coding of data and metadata,
created with Reliable Service Composition (RSC), then the
it should be noted that the N channel uses calculated above
dashed curve depicts the latency requirements when the basic
should contain both the data and the metadata. This implies
mode of RSC is considered. In basic mode, each user sends
that the receiver Bob should know in advance that Alice may
at most D bits, where D < D. This illustrates the fact that,
b b transmit an ultra-reliable message over the time-frequency
when each user has a small set of possible messages, then
grid having N degrees of freedom; only after decoding the
an efficient design of data and metadata can lead to protocols
message, Bob can verify that it had been intended to him.
with significantly optimized latency performance.
Keeping the receiver ready over a large bandwidth may not be
There is a methodological difference between URC-L and
energy efficient, but this is the investment that Bob can make
URC-S in the following sense: while URC-L can rely on the
as a receiver towards achieving URC. On the other hand, Alice
bounds and the coding methods related to classical information
can invest a larger transmission power. A good URC system
theory, where the codeword length is very large, URC-S should
design should strike a good balance between the investments
rely on the techniques for coding short packets as well as
of the transmitter and the receiver.
the fundamental results from the area of coding for finite
blocklength [5]. We illustrate how these results can be used to IV. WIRELESS RELIABILITY IMPAIRMENTS
design systems with guaranteed reliability. Let us fix the target
The second dimension for analyzing URC is the type of
packet error probability to (cid:15) and assume that there is an AWGN
reliability impairment (RI). We have identified five RIs.
channel with SNR of γ. Let n be the number of channel uses
1) Decreased power of the useful signal: This RI refers to
over which the codeword should span. The following relation
the basic propagation mechanisms, such as fading and shadow-
is given in [5]:
ing. Knowing the statistics of the received signal in the target
√
1
log M(n,(cid:15)) ≈ nC − nV Q−1((cid:15)) + log n (4) scenario leads to a proper selection of the coding/modulation
2 2 2
parameters for the metadata (e.g. frame synchronization se-
For given n and (cid:15), M(n,(cid:15)) is the maximal number of different quence, preambles) and the data. With limited transmission
messages that can be sent over the n channel uses such that the power, the key mechanisms for mitigating this impairment are
probability of reception error is (cid:15). C is the capacity of AWGN joint data/metadata encoding, flexible use of the degrees of
channel for given γ, while V is the dispersion of the channel, freedom in frequency and space as well as the new coding
also dependent on the SNR and defined in [5]. The function Q techniques for short blocklength. Furthermore, sending reliable
is the standard function Q(x) = (cid:82)∞ √1 e−t2/2dt. We would short messages over channels with fast dynamics, where the
x 2π
like to put a different perspective on (4). Let us assume that channel estimation at the receiver may not be feasible, require
a message of size 10 bytes needs to be sent over a point-to- methods for noncoherent communication.
point channel; this corresponds to 80 bits, such that the total 2) Uncontrollable interference: This impairment has been
number of possible messages is M = 280. Let the SNR of the the crux of regulating frequency bands. The open access
AWGN channel be γ = 0 [dB] and the target error probability in the unlicensed bands requires to deal with uncontrollable
be (cid:15) = 10−3. What is the minimal number of channel uses interference, while the high price for a licensed band offers the
that needs to be applied? Using numerical solution of (4) for a right to have control over the interference. Nevertheless, the

5G networks will feature sources of unpredictable interference systems. We have provided several motivating scenarios for
even in the licensed bands. Two examples are ultra-dense supporting URC in future wireless applications. We have
deployments of small cells with limited coordination and analyzed the anatomy of a wireless digital link and shown
underlay D2D communication. This RI can be addressed that the introduction of URC requires fundamental rethinking
through dynamic spectrum usage, ad hoc cooperation among in the relationship between the control information (metadata)
the interferers, etc. and the actual data, since at high reliability levels the way the
3) Resource depletion due to competition: This is in a metadata is encoded and sent cannot be based on the usual
way similar to the second RI; however, this RI refers to the “worst case” analysis. The paper introduces the important
problem in which multiple devices are trying to share the concept of Reliable Service Composition, where a service is
communication resources in the same system. For example, designed to adapt its requirements to the level of reliability that
in reliable coordination among vehicles, each vehicle tries can be attained. For example, a service can have a “minimal
to communicate with all other vehicles, such that they are variant” that contains messages that can be encoded and
competing for the same wireless resources. This is the case transmitted with very high reliability. We have also introduced
where resource depletion happens in D2D communication. different types of URC, long- and short-term, respectively,
Traditionally, localized D2D connections have been carried based on the time frame that is used as a reference to determine
out in unlicensed spectrum. Wireless 5G systems will feature the latency of the reliable transmission. Finally, we have
network-controlled D2D communication, where the localized identified five general types of reliability impairments that
competition for resources among the devices is made more need to be carefully modeled if the system is designed to
efficient by relying on arbitration and coordination from the attain ultra-high reliability levels.
cellular network. Network-arbitrated resource competition is
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
one of the key enablers of URC among proximate devices.
Part of this work has been performed in the framework of
Besides D2D, resource depletion can happen in the down-
the FP7 project ICT-317669 METIS, which is partly funded
link (DL) and uplink (UL). In DL the infrastructure has a
by the European Union. The author would like to acknowledge
complete control over the allocation of resources and it can
the contributions of their colleagues in METIS, although the
reach the allocation limit if too many devices need to be
views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily
served. For example, if the number of users in a given area
represent the project.
suddenly increases (e.g. public event), then in order to attain
the URC-L operation on Fig. 3, the signaling in the system
REFERENCES
needs to have the required level of flexibility and granularity
[1] F. Boccardi, R. Heath, A. Lozano, T. Marzetta, and P. Popovski,
in allocating the resources in order to keep all the users
“Five disruptive technology directions for 5G,” IEEE Communications
connected. In the UL the problem is even more aggravated,
Magazine, vol. 52, pp. 74–80, February 2014.
due to the lack of coordination across the devices and resource [2] A. Osseiran, F. Boccardi, V. Braun, K. Kusume, P. Marsch, M. Maternia,
O. Queseth, M. Schellmann, H. Schotten, H. Taoka, H. Tullberg,
wastes due to collisions, back-off, etc. The key enablers
M. Uusitalo, B. Timus, and M. Fallgren, “Scenarios for 5G mobile
of efficient competition for UL radio resources are non-
and wireless communications: the vision of the METIS project,” IEEE
orthogonal operation and successive interference cancellation, Communications Magazine, vol. 52, pp. 26–35, May 2014.
[3] G.FettweisandS.Alamouti,“5G:Personalmobileinternetbeyondwhat
as in protocols for coded random access [9].
cellular did to telephony,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 52,
4) Protocol reliability mismatch: The fourth RI refers to
pp. 140–145, February 2014.
the fact that the protocol may be not sufficiently adaptable [4] C. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell System
Technical Journal, vol. 27, pp. 379–423 and 623–656, July/October
to offer the required reliability. As discussed in Section II-A,
1948.
under deteriorating receiving conditions, it becomes a problem
[5] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Channel coding rate in the
to receive the metadata, which is a precondition to receive the finite blocklength regime,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 56, no. 5,
pp. 2307–2359, 2010.
data. This RI can be addressed by having protocols that can
[6] J.-R. Ohm, “Advances in scalable video coding,” Proceedings of the
adapt the transmission of the metadata to the current condi-
IEEE, vol. 93, pp. 42–56, Jan 2005.
tions. We have experimentally shown that such an approach [7] P. Popovski, V. Braun, G. Mange, P. Fertl, D. Gozalvez-Serrano,
N. Bayer, H. Droste, A. Roos, G. Zimmerman, M. Fallgren, A. Hoglund,
can offer very robust link even with a slight modification of
H. Tullberg, S. Jeux, O. Bulakci, J. Eichinger, Z. Li, P. Marsch,
the protocol and without introducing changes in the physical
K. Pawlak, M. Boldi, and J. F. Monserrat, “Initial report on horizontal
layer [10]. topics, first results and 5g system concept,” METIS Deliverable D6.2,
March 2014.
5) Equipment failure: Equipment failure is a RI that is
[8] T. Marzetta, “Noncooperative cellular wireless with unlimited numbers
primarily related to disaster/emergency scenarios, where part
of base station antennas,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communica-
of the infrastructure becomes dysfunctional. It is addressed tions, vol. 9, pp. 3590–3600, November 2010.
[9] C. Stefanovic, P. Popovski, and D. Vukobratovic, “Frameless aloha
through techniques from ad hoc networking, use of D2D
protocol for wireless networks,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 16,
communication, etc.
no. 12, pp. 2087–2090, 2012.
[10] P. Popovski, G. Madueno, L. Gimenez, L. Luque Sanchez, and N.-
V. CONCLUSION C. Gjerrild, “Protocol coding for reliable wireless bits under jamming:
Concept and experimental validation,” in IEEE MILCOM, pp. 113–118,
Ultra-reliable communication (URC) will be one of the new
Nov 2011.
operating features that will be brought up by the 5G wireless