Counting copies of a fixed subgraph in F -free graphs
Da´niel Gerbner∗ Cory Palmer†
9102 peS 6  ]OC.htam[  3v02570.5081:viXra
Abstract
Fix graphs F and H and let ex(n,H,F) denote the maximum possible number
of copies of the graph H in an n-vertex F-free graph. The systematic study of this
function was initiated by Alon and Shikhelman [J. Comb. Theory, B. 121 (2016)]. In
this paper, we give new general bounds concerning this generalized Tur´an function.
We also determine ex(n,P ,K ) (where P is a path on k vertices) and ex(n,C ,K )
k 2,t k k 2,t
asymptotically for every k and t. For example, it is shown that for t ≥ 2 and k ≥ 5
(cid:0) (cid:1)
we have ex(n,C ,K ) = 1 + o(1) (t − 1)k/2nk/2. We also characterize the graphs
k 2,t 2k
F that cause the function ex(n,C ,F) to be linear in n. In the final section we discuss
k
a connection between the function ex(n,H,F) and Berge hypergraph problems.
Keywords: Tur´an numbers, generalized Tura´n numbers
AMS Subj. Class. (2010): 05C35, 05C38
1 Introduction
Let G and F be graphs. We say that a graph G is F-free if it contains no copy of F as a
subgraph. Following Alon and Shikhelman [1], let us denote the maximum number of copies
of the graph H in an n-vertex F-free graph by
ex(n,H,F).
The case when H is a single edge is the classical Tur´an problem of extremal graph theory. In
particular, the Tur´an number of a graph F is the maximum number of edges possible in an n-
vertex F-free graph G. This parameter is denoted ex(n,F) and thus ex(n,K ,F) = ex(n,F).
2
For more on the ordinary Tur´an number see, for example, the survey [13]. Recall that the
∗Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Alfr´ed R´enyi Institute of Mathematics, P.O.B. 127, Budapest H-1364,
Hungary. e-mail: gerbner.daniel@renyi.mta.hu.
†Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Montana, Missoula, Montana 59812, USA. e-mail:
cory.palmer@umontana.edu
(cid:13)c 2019. This manuscript version is made available under the CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
1

Tur´an graph T (n) is the complete (k − 1)-partite graph with n vertices such that the
k−1
vertex classes are of size as close to each other as possible.
In 1949, Zykov [39] proved that the Tura´n graph T (n) is the unique graph containing
k−1
the maximum possible number of copies of K in an n-vertex K -free graph (when t < k).
t k
By counting copies of K in T (n) we get the following corollary for ex(n,K ,K ). Let
t k−1 t k
N(H,G) denote the number of copies of the subgraph H in the graph G.
Corollary 1 (Zykov, [39]). If t < k, then
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)t
k − 1 n
ex(n,K ,K ) = N(K ,T (n)) = + o(nt).
t k t k−1
t k − 1
This result was rediscovered by Erdo˝s [7] and also follows from a theorem of Bolloba´s [2]
and the case t = 3 and k = 4 was known to Moon and Moser [37]. Another proof appears
in Alon and Shikhelman [1] modifying a proof of Tur´an’s theorem.
When H is a pentagon, C , and F is a triangle, K , the determination of ex(n,C ,K ) is
5 3 5 3
a well-known conjecture of Erd˝os [9]. An upper bound of 1.03(n)5 was proved by Gyo˝ri [23].
5
The blow-up of a C gives a lower-bound of (n)5 when n is divisible by 5. Hatami, Hladky´,
5
5
Kra´l’, Norine and Razborov [28] and independently Grzesik [21] proved
(cid:16)n(cid:17)5
ex(n,C ,K ) ≤ . (1)
5 3
5
Swapping the role of C and K , we count the number of triangles in a pentagon-free
5 3
graph. Bolloba´s and Gyo˝ri [4] determined
1 5
(1 + o(1)) √ n3/2 ≤ ex(n,K ,C ) ≤ (1 + o(1)) n3/2.
3 5
3 3 4
√
The constant in the upper bound was improved to 3 by Alon and Shikhelman [1]
3
and by Ergemlidze, Gy˝ori, Methuku and Salia [11]. Gy˝ori and Li [27] give bounds on
ex(n,K ,C ). A particularly interesting case to determine the value of ex(n,K ,K )
3 2k+1 3 r,r,r
was posed by Erdo˝s [8] (second part of Problem 17) and remains open in general.
The systematic study of the function ex(n,H,F) was initiated by Alon and Shikhelman
[1] who proved a number of different bounds. Two examples from their paper are as follows.
An analogue of the K˝ova´ri-So´s-Tura´n theorem
ex(n,K ,K ) = O(n3−3/s)
3 s,t
which is shown to be sharp in the order of magnitude when t > (s − 1)! (see also [30]).
Another example is an Erdo˝s-Stone-Simonovits-type result that for fixed integers t < k
and a k-chromatic graph F that
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)t
k − 1 n
ex(n,K ,F) = + o(nt). (2)
t
t k − 1
2

Gishboliner and Shapira [20] determined the order of magnitude of ex(n,C ,C ) for every
k (cid:96)
(cid:96) and k ≥ 3. Moreover, they determined ex(n,C ,C ) asymptotically. We give a theorem
k 4
(proved independently of the previous authors) that extends this result to ex(n,C ,K ).
k 2,t
Other results on the function ex(n,H,F) appear in [17, 14, 36, 26, 34, 22, 5].
The goal of this paper is to determine new bounds ex(n,H,F) and investigate its behavior
as a function. In Section 2 we give general bounds using standard extremal graph theory
techniques. In particular, we give the following extension of (2) using a modification of its
proof in [1].
Theorem 2. Let H be a graph and F be a graph with chromatic number k, then
ex(n,H,F) ≤ ex(n,H,K ) + o(n|H|).
k
Theorem 2 only gives a useful upper-bound if ex(n,H,K ) = Ω(n|H|), which happens if
k
and only if K is not a subgraph of H. For example, (2) follows by applying Corollary 1 in
k
the case when H = K . Applying (1) to the case when H = C gives
t 5
(cid:16)n(cid:17)5
ex(n,C ,F) ≤ + o(n5)
5
5
for every graph F with chromatic number 3. When F contains a triangle, the construction
giving the lower bound in (1) can be used to give an asymptotically equal lower bound on
ex(n,C ,F).
5
In Section 3 we determine ex(n,P ,K ) and ex(n,C ,K ) asymptotically.
k 2,t k 2,t
It is natural to investigate which graphs H and F cause ex(n,H,F) to be linear in n.
When H is K , Alon and Shikhelman [1] characterized the graphs F with ex(n,K ,F) =
3 3
O(n). In Section 4 we determine which graphs F give ex(n,C ,F) = O(n). Finally, in
k
Section 5 we establish connections between this counting subgraph problem and Berge hy-
pergraph problems. For notation not defined in this paper, see Bollob´as [3].
2 General bounds on ex(n, H, F )
In this section we prove several general bounds on ex(n,H,F) using standard extremal
graph theory techniques. We begin with a proof of Theorem 2. The proof mimics the proof
of the Erd˝os-Stone-Simonovits by the regularity lemma. We use the following version of
the regularity lemma and an embedding lemma found in [3]. Recall that the density of a
pair A,B of vertex sets is d(A,B) = e(A,B)/|A||B|, where e(A,B) is the number of edges
between A and B. Furthermore, the pair A,B is (cid:15)-regular if for any subsets A(cid:48) ⊂ A, B(cid:48) ⊂ B
with |A(cid:48)| ≥ (cid:15)|A| and |B(cid:48)| ≥ (cid:15)|B|, we have |d(A,B) − d(A(cid:48),B(cid:48))| < (cid:15).
Lemma 3 (Regularity Lemma). For an integer m and 0 < (cid:15) < 1/2 there exists an integer
M = M((cid:15),m) such that every graph on n ≥ m vertices has a partition V ,V ,...,V with
0 1 r
m ≤ r ≤ M where |V | < (cid:15)n, |V | = |V | = ··· = |V | and all but at most (cid:15)r2 of the pairs
0 1 2 r
V ,V , 1 ≤ i < j ≤ r are (cid:15)-regular.
i j
3

Lemma 4 (Embedding lemma). Let F be a k-chromatic graph with f ≥ 2 vertices. Fix
0 < δ < 1, let G be a graph and let V ,...,V be disjoint sets of vertices of G. If each V
1 k i
k
has |V | ≥ δ−f and each pair of partition classes is δf-regular with density ≥ δ + δf, then G
i
contains F as a subgraph.
Proof of Theorem 2. Fix δ > 0 and an integer m ≥ k such that the following inequality
holds
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 δ + δf
+ 2δf + N(H,K ) < α. (3)
|H|
2m 2
Let us apply the regularity lemma with (cid:15) = δf and m to get M = M((cid:15),m). Let G be a
graph on n > Mδ−f vertices and more than
ex(n,H,K ) + αn|H|
k
copies of H. We will show that G contains F as a subgraph.
Let V ,V ,...,V be the partition of G given by the regularity lemma. We will remove
0 1 r
the following edges.
(cid:0) (cid:1)
1. Remove the edges inside of each V . There are at most r n/r ≤ n2 ≤ 1 n2 such edges.
i
2 2r 2m
2. Remove the edges between all pairs V ,V that are not (cid:15)-regular. There are at most
i j
(cid:15)r2 such pairs and each has at most (n)2 edges. So we remove at most (cid:15)n2 such edges.
r
3. Remove the edges between all pairs V ,V if the density d(V ,V ) < δ + δf. There are
i j i j
(cid:0) (cid:1)
less than r (δ + δf)(n)2 < δ+δf n2 such edges.
2 r 2
4. Remove all edges incident to V . There are at most (cid:15)n2 such edges.
0
In total we have removed at most
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 δ + δf
+ 2δf + n2
2m 2
edges. There are at most N(H,K )n|H|−2 copies of H containing a fixed edge. Therefore,
|H|
by (3) we have removed less than αn|H| copies of H. Thus, the resulting graph still has more
than ex(n,H,K ) copies of H so it contains K as a subgraph.
k k
The k classes of the resulting graph that correspond to the vertices of K satisfy the
k
conditions of the embedding lemma so G contains F.
Using a standard first-moment argument of Erdo˝s-R´enyi [10] we can get a lower-bound
on the number of copies of H in an F-free graph.
Proposition 5. Let F and H be graphs such that e(F) > e(H). Then
(cid:16) (cid:17)
e(H)(|F|−2)
|H|−
ex(n,H,F) = Ω n .
e(F)−e(H)
4

Proof. Let G be an n-vertex random graph with edge probability
|F|−2
−
p = cn
e(F)−e(H)
where c = |H||H|(e(F)−e(H)) + 1.
Among |F| vertices in G there are at most |F|! copies of the graph F. Therefore, the
expected number of copies of F is at most
(cid:18) (cid:19)
n
|F|! pe(F) ≤ n|F|pe(F).
|F|
Fix |H| vertices in G. The probability of a particular copy of H appearing among those
vertices is pe(H). Thus, the probability of at least one copy of H appearing among those |H|
vertices is at least pe(H). Therefore, the expected number of copies of H is at least
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)|H|
n n
pe(H) ≥ pe(H).
|H| |H|
We remove an edge from each copy of F in G and count the remaining copies of H. There
are at most n|H|−2 copies of H destroyed for each edge removed from G.
Let X be the random variable defined by the difference between the number of copies of
H and the number of copies of H destroyed by the removal of edges. The expectation of X
is
(cid:18) (cid:19)|H|
n
E[X] ≥ pe(H) − n|H|−2n|F|pe(F).
|H|
Which simplifies to
(cid:16) (cid:17)
e(H)(|F|−2)
|H|−
E[X] = Ω n .
e(F)−e(H)
This implies that there exists a graph such that after removing an edge from each copy of
F we are left with at least E[X] copies of H.
We conclude this section with two simple bounds on ex(n,H,F). Neither result is likely
to give a sharp bound, but may be useful as simple tools.
Proposition 6. ex(n,H,F) ≥ ex(n,F) − ex(n,H).
Proof. Consider an edge-maximal n-vertex F-free graph G. Remove an edge from each copy
of the subgraph H in G. The resulting graph does not contain H and therefore has at most
ex(n,H) edges. This means we have removed at least ex(n,F)−ex(n,H) edges from G, thus
G (which is an F-free graph on n vertices) contained at least ex(n,F) − ex(n,H) copies of
H.
The other simple observation is a consequence of the Kruskal-Katona theorem [32, 29]. A
hypergraph H is k-uniform if all hyperedges have size k. For a k-uniform hypergraph H, the
i-shadow is the i-uniform hypergraph ∆ H whose hyperedges are the collection of all subsets
i
of size i of the hyperedges of H. We denote the collection hyperedges of a hypergraph H by
E(H). Here we use a version of the Kruskal-Katona theorem due to Lova´sz [35].
5

Theorem 7 (Lova´sz, [35]). If H is a k-uniform hypergraph and
(cid:18) (cid:19)
x x(x − 1)···(x − k + 1)
|E(H)| = =
k k!
for some real number x ≥ k, then
(cid:18) (cid:19)
x
|E(∆ H)| ≥ .
i
i
This gives the following easy corollary,
Corollary 8.
ex(n,K ,F) ≤ ex(n,F)t/2.
t
Proof. Suppose G is F-free and has the maximum number of copies of K . Let us consider
t
the hypergraph H whose hyperedges are the vertex sets of each copy of K in G. Pick x such
t
that the number of hyperedges in H is
(cid:18) (cid:19)
x
|E(H)| = . (4)
t
Applying Theorem 7 we get that the 2-uniform hypergraph (i.e., graph) ∆ H has size at
2
(cid:0) (cid:1)
x
least .
2
On the other hand, the family ∆ H is a subgraph of G. Therefore,
2
(cid:18) (cid:19)
x
≤ e(G) ≤ ex(n,F). (5)
2
Combining (4) and (5) gives the corollary.
3 Counting paths and cycles in K -free graphs
2,t
The maximum number of edges in a K -free graph is
2,t
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 √
ex(n,K ) = + o(1) t − 1n3/2. (6)
2,t
2
The upper bound above is given by Ko˝va´ri, S´os and Tura´n [31] and the lower bound
is given by an algebraic construction of Fu¨redi [12]. We will refer to this construction as
the Fu¨redi graph F . We recall some well-known properties of F without giving a full
q,t q,t
description of its construction. For fixed t and q a prime power such that t−1 divides q −1,
the graph F has n = (q2 − 1)/(t − 1) vertices. All but at most 2q vertices have degree
q,t √
q and the others have degree q − 1, thus the number of edges is (1/2 + o(1)) t − 1n3/2.
Furthermore, every pair of vertices has at most t − 1 common neighbors while every pair of
non-adjacent vertices has exactly t − 1 common neighbors.
Alon and Shikhelman [1] used the Fu¨redi graph to give a lower bound in the following
theorem.
6

Theorem 9 (Alon, Shikhelman, [1]).
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1
ex(n,K ,K ) = + o(1) (t − 1)3/2n3/2.
3 2,t
6
We generalize this theorem to cycles of arbitrary length and paths. We use the notation
v v ···v for the path P with vertices v ,...,v and edges v v (for 1 ≤ i ≤ k − 1). The
1 2 k k 1 k i i+1
cycle C that includes this path and the edge v v is denoted v v ···v v .
k k 1 1 2 k 1
Proposition 10. For t ≥ 3,
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 t − 1
ex(n,C ,K ) = + o(1) n2.
4 2,t
4 2
Proof. We begin with the upper bound. Consider an n-vertex graph G that is K -free.
2,t
Fix two vertices u and v. As G is K -free, u and v have at most t − 1 common neighbors.
2,t
(cid:0) (cid:1)
t−1
Therefore the number of C s with u and v as non-adjacent vertices is at most . Therefore,
4
2
the number of C s in G is at most
4
(cid:18) (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
1 n t − 1 1 t − 1
≤ n2
2 2 2 4 2
as each cycle is counted twice.
The lower bound is given by the Fu¨redi graph F . Every pair of non-adjacent vertices
q,t
(cid:0) (cid:1)
t−1
has t − 1 common neighbors, so there are copies of C containing them. There are
4
2
(1/2 + o(1))n2 pairs of non-adjacent vertices in F . Each C is counted twice in this way,
q,t 4
so the number of C s in F is at least
4 q,t
(cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:18) (cid:19)
1 1 t − 1
+ o(1) n2
2 2 2
A slightly more sophisticated argument than the proof of Proposition 10 is needed to
count longer cycles and paths.
Theorem 11. Fix t ≥ 2. For k ≥ 5,
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1
ex(n,C ,K ) = + o(1) (t − 1)k/2nk/2
k 2,t
2k
and for k ≥ 2,
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1
ex(n,P ,K ) = + o(1) (t − 1)(k−1)/2n(k+1)/2.
k 2,t
2
7

Proof. We begin with the upper bound for ex(n,C ,K ). Let G be a K -free graph. We
k 2,t 2,t
distinguish two cases based on the parity of k.
Case 1: k is even. Fix a (k/2)-tuple (x ,x ,...,x ) of distinct vertices of G. This can
1 2 k/2
be done in at most nk/2 ways. We count the number of cycles v v ···v v such that x = v
1 2 k 1 i 2i
for 1 ≤ i ≤ k/2. As G is K -free, there are at most t − 1 choices for each vertex v on
2,t 2i+1
the cycle (for 0 ≤ i ≤ (k − 2)/2) as v must be joined to both v and v (where the
2i+1 2i+2 2i
indicies are modulo k). Each cycle v v ···v v is counted by 2k different (k/2)-tuples, so
1 2 k 1
the number of copies of C is at most
k
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1
(t − 1)k/2nk/2.
2k
Case 2: k is odd. Fix a ((k + 1)/2)-tuple (x ,x ,...,x ,y,z) of distinct vertices
1 2 (k−3)/2
such that yz is an edge. This can be done in at most
2e(G)n(k−3)/2 ≤ (1 + o(1))(t − 1)1/2n3/2n(k−3)/2 = (1 + o(1))(t − 1)1/2nk/2
ways by (6). We count the number of cycles v v ···v v such that x = v for 1 ≤ i ≤
1 2 k 1 i 2i
(k − 3)/2, y = v , and z = v . Similar to Case 1, as G is K -free, there are at most t − 1
k−1 k 2,t
choices for each of the (k−1)/2 remaining vertices v of the cycle. Each cycle v v ···v v
2i+1 1 2 k 1
is counted by 2k different ((k + 1)/2)-tuples, so the number of copies of C is at most
k
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 1
(t − 1)(k−1)/2 (1 + o(1))(t − 1)1/2nk/2 = + o(1) (t − 1)k/2nk/2.
2k 2k
For the upper bound on ex(n,P ,K ) we fix a tuple of distinct vertices of G as above. We
k 2,t
sketch the proof and leave the remaining details to the reader. If k is odd we fix a ((k+1)/2)-
tuple (x ,x ,...,x ) and if k is even we fix a ((k +2)/2)-tuple (x ,x ,...,x ,y,z)
1 2 (k+1)/2 1 2 (k−2)/2
such that yz is an edge. In both cases we count the paths v v ···v such that x = v
1 2 k i 2i−1
and with the additional conditions that y = v , and z = v in the case k even. Similar to
k−1 k
the case for cycles there are at most t − 1 choices for each of the remaining vertices of the
path. Each path is counted exactly two times in this way.
Both lower bounds are given by the Fu¨redi graph F for q large enough compared to t
q,t
and k. We begin by counting copies of the path P = v v ···v greedily. The vertex v can
k 1 2 k 1
be chosen in n ways. As the Fu¨redi graph F has minimum degree q −1, we can pick vertex
q,t
v (for i > 1) in at least q − i + 1 ways. Each path is counted twice in this way, therefore,
i
we have at least
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 1
n(q − k + 1)k−1 = + o(1) (t − 1)(k−1)/2n(k+1)/2
2 2
paths of length k in the Fu¨redi graph F .
q,t
For counting copies of the cycle C = v v ···v v we proceed as above with the addition
k 1 2 k 1
that v should be adjacent to v . In order to do this, we pick v arbitrarily and v ,...,v
k 1 1 2 k−3
greedily as in the case of paths. As k ≥ 5 the vertex v is distinct from v . From the
k−3 1
8

neighbors of v we pick v that is not adjacent to v . The number of choices for v
k−3 k−2 1 k−2
is at least q − k + 3 − (t − 1) as v and v have at most t − 1 common neighbors. From
k−3 1
the neighbors of v we pick v that is not adjacent to any of the vertices v ,...,v .
k−2 k−1 1 k−3
Each v has at most t − 1 common neighbors with v which forbids at most (k − 3)(t − 1)
i k−2
vertices as a choice for v . Therefore, we have at least q − k − 2 − (k − 3)(t − 1) choices
k−1
for v .
k−1
Since v is not joined to v by an edge they have t − 1 common neighbors and none of
k−1 1
these neighbors are among v ,v ,...,v . Hence we can pick any of the common neighbors
1 2 k−1
as v . Every copy of C is counted 2k times, thus altogether we have at least
k k
(cid:18) (cid:19)
1 1
n(q − t(k − 3))k−2(t − 1) = + o(1) (t − 1)k/2nk/2
2k 2k
copies of C .
k
4 Linearity of the function ex(n, C , F )
k
Recall that Alon and Shikhelman [1] characterized the graphs F with ex(n,K ,F) = O(n).
3
For trees they also essentially answer the question by determining the order of magnitude
of ex(n,T,F) where both T and F are trees. One can easily see that their proof extends to
the case when F is a forest. On the other hand, if F contains a cycle and T is a tree, then
ex(n,F) is superlinear and ex(n,T) is linear. Thus by Proposition 6 we have that ex(n,T,F)
is superlinear.
Figure 1: The graphs C∗r, C∗∗r and, C∗∗r
k 4 5
Now we turn our attention to the case when H is a cycle. We begin by introducing some
notation. Let C∗r be a cycle C with r additional vertices adjacent to a vertex x of the C .
k k k
For k = 4, let C∗∗r be a cycle v v v v with 2r additional vertices; r are adjacent to v and
4 1 2 3 4 1
r are adjacent to v . Similarly, let C∗∗r be a cycle v v v v v with 2r additional vertices; r
3 5 1 2 3 4 5
are adjacent to v and r are adjacent to v . See Figure 1 for examples of these graphs.
1 3
9

r internal paths
Br
a
r internal paths of length t
u v
main vertices
length d path
u(cid:48)
length b path
main vertices
v(cid:48)
Br
main path
c
Banana graph Br Qr-graph Rr(a, b, c, d)
t k k
Figure 2: A banana graph Br, a Qr-graph, and Rr(a,b,c,d)
t k k
A banana graph Br is the union of r internally-disjoint u–v paths of length t. We call the
t
vertices u,v the main vertices of Br and the u–v paths of Br are its internal paths.
t t
For t < k, let Qr(t) be the graph consisting of a banana graph Br with main vertices u,v
k t
and a u–v path of length k −t that is otherwise disjoint from Br. Alternatively, Qr(t)-graph
t k
is a C with r − 1 additional paths of length t between two vertices that are joined by a
k
path of length t in the C . For simplicity, we call any graph Qr(t) a Qr-graph. The internal
k k k
paths and main vertices of a Qr-graph are simply the internal paths and main vertices of
k
the associated banana graph Br. The main path of a Qr-graph is the associated u–v path of
t k
length k − t.
For a,c ≥ 2 and b,d ≥ 0 such that a+b+c+d = k, let Rr(a,b,c,d) be the graph formed
k
by a copy of Br with main vertices u,v and a copy of Br with main vertices u(cid:48),v(cid:48) together
a c
with a v–v(cid:48) path of length b and a u–u(cid:48) path of length d = k − (a + b + c). When b = 0 we
identify the vertices v and u(cid:48) and when d = 0 we identify the vertices u and v(cid:48). Note that the
last parameter d is redundant, but we include it for ease of visualizing individual instances
of this graph. For simplicity, we call any graph Rr(a,b,c,d) an Rr-graph. Finally, call a
k k
graph G an Fr-graph if G is a forest and is a subgraph of every Rr-graph (for all permissible
k k
values of a,b,c,d).
We now characterize those graphs F for which the function ex(n,C ,F) is linear.
k
Theorem 12. For k = 4 and k = 5, if F is a subgraph of C∗∗r (for some r large enough),
k
then ex(n,C ,F) = O(n). For k > 5, if F is a subgraph of C∗r or an Fr-graph (for some
k k k
r large enough), then ex(n,C ,F) = O(n). On the other hand, for every k > 3 and every
k
other F we have ex(n,C ,F) = Ω(n2).
k
It is difficult to give a simple characterization of Fr-graphs. However, the following lemma
k
gives some basic properties of these forests. For simplicity, the term high degree refers to a
10

vertex of degree greater than 2. A star is a single high degree vertex joined to vertices of
degree 1. A broom is a path (possibly of a single vertex) with additional leaves attached to
one of its end-vertices. Finally, let c(F) be the sum of the number of vertices in the longest
path in each component of F (excluding the isolated vertex components).
Figure 3: An Fr-graph with a non-broom component and an Fr-graph F with c(F) = k +4.
k k
Proposition 13. Let F be an Fr-graph, i.e., F is a subforest of every Rr-graph. Then the
k k
following properties hold when k > 5:
1. F has at most two vertices of high degree. This implies that all but at most two
components of F are paths.
2. Each component of F has at most one vertex of high degree.
3. Each vertex of high degree in F is adjacent to at most two vertices of degree 2.
4. If F has two high degree vertices, then at least one of them is contained in a component
that is a broom.
5. The number of vertices in the longest path in F is at most k.
6. c(F) ≤ k + 4.
7. If c(F) = k +4, then F contains three components that are stars on at least 3 vertices.
Furthermore, each component of F with a high degree vertex is a star.
Proof. The first property follows as F is a subgraph of the graph Rr(2,0,k −2,0) which has
k
exactly two high degree vertices.
11

For property two, consider the graphs Rr(2,0,k −2,0) and Rr(3,0,k −3,0). Each graph
k k
has two high degree vertices and they are at distance 2 and 3, respectively. If F had a
component with two high degree vertices, then these vertices would be at distance 2 and 3
simultaneously; a contradiction. Note that we use k > 5 here.
For property three, consider the graph Rr(2,0,2,k − 4). This graph contains three high
k
degree vertices x,y,z such that every vertex adjacent to y is adjacent to either x or z. If F
has a component with a high degree vertex adjacent to more than two vertices of degree 2,
then that component contains a cycle; a contradiction.
For property four, again consider the graph Rr(2,0,2,k − 4) and denote the three high
k
degree vertices x,y,z as before. If F has two components each with a high degree vertex,
then without loss of generality one of these high degree vertices is x. If x is adjacent to two
vertices of degree 2 in F, then one of these vertices is y. Therefore, the other high degree
vertex in F is z. The component containing z cannot contain y, so z is adjacent to at most
one vertex of degree 2, i.e., the component containing z is a broom.
For property five, observe that the number of vertices in a longest path in Rr(2,0,2,k−4)
k
is k.
For property six and seven we can assume that all the components of F are paths (by
deleting unnecessary leaves) and that each component contains at least two vertices.
Consider again the graph Rr(2,0,2,k−4) with high degree vertices x,y,z as above. Note
k
that this graph contains an x–z path on k − 3 vertices. The components of F containing
x or z have at most 2 additional vertices not on this path. Moreover, the component of
F containing y has at most 3 vertices not on this path (this includes y itself). Therefore,
c(F) ≤ k − 3 + 2 + 2 + 3 = k + 4. This proves property six. In order to achieve equality
c(F) = k + 4 there must be three distinct components containing x, y and z and each of
these components has 3 vertices in their longest path, i.e., each such component is a star.
This proves property seven.
The next lemma establishes another class of graphs that contains each Fr-graph as a
k
subgraph.
Lemma 14. Let k > 5 and H be a graph formed by two Qr-graphs Q ,Q such that Q and
k 1 2 1
Q share at most one vertex and such a vertex is on the main path of both Q and Q . Then
2 1 2
each Fr-graph is a subgraph of H.
k
Proof. Let F be an Fr-graph. We will show that F can be embedded in H. Suppose Q ,Q
k 1 2
share a vertex x on their main paths as this is the more difficult case.
Let F(cid:48) be a graph formed by components of F such that c(F(cid:48)) ≤ k and there is at most
one vertex of high degree in F(cid:48). We claim that F(cid:48) can be embedded into Q . Indeed, first
2
we embed the component of F(cid:48) containing the high degree vertex using a main vertex of Q .
2
The remaining (path) components of F(cid:48) can be embedded into the remaining vertices of the
C in Q greedily. Now, if we can embed components of F into Q without using the vertex
k 2 1
x such that the remaining components satisfy the conditions of F(cid:48) above, then we are done.
First suppose that c(F) = k + 4. By property seven of Proposition 13 let T and T(cid:48) be
distinct star components of F such that T has exactly 3 vertices. It is easy to see that T
12

and T(cid:48) can both be embedded to Q without using the vertex x. Therefore, the remaining
1
components of F can be embedded into Q .
2
We may now assume c(F) ≤ k + 3. If F contains a single component, then it can be
embedded into Q by property five of Proposition 13. If F has no high degree vertex, then
1
every component is a path. In this case it is easy to embed F into Q and Q . So let us
1 2
assume that F contains at least two components and at least one high degree vertex.
The graph Q has two high degree vertices. Therefore, one of them is connected to x by
1
a path P with (cid:96) > (k + 2)/2.
(cid:96)
Suppose F contains two high degree vertices, then let T be a component containing a
high degree vertex. We may assume that the number of vertices on the longest path in T is
at most (k + 3)/2 (as there are two components with a high degree vertex). Therefore, we
may embed T into Q without using the vertex x. The remaining components of F can be
1
embedded into Q .
2
Now suppose F contains exactly one high degree vertex. If F contains a component with
longest path on k vertices, then it can be embedded into Q and the remaining component
2
of F can be embedded into Q without using vertex x. So we may assume all components
1
in F have longest paths with less than k vertices. If there is a (path) component on at
least three vertices, then it can be embedded into Q without using the vertex x and the
1
remaining components of F can be embedded into Q . If there is no such path, then all path
2
components are single edges. Two such edges can be embedded into Q without using the
1
vertex x and the remaining components can be embedded into Q as before.
2
A version of the next lemma has already appeared in a slightly different form in [15].
u u(cid:48) v(cid:48) v
Figure 4: The graph B from Lemma 15
Lemma 15. Fix integers s ≥ 2 and i ≥ 2. Let G be a graph containing a family P of (si)2i−2
u–v paths of length i. Then G contains a subgraph B consisting of a banana graph Bs (for
t
some t ≤ i) with main vertices u(cid:48),v(cid:48) together with a u–u(cid:48) path and and v(cid:48)–v path that are
disjoint from each other and otherwise disjoint from B (we allow that the additional paths
be of length 0, i.e., u = u(cid:48) and v = v(cid:48)), such that each u–v path in B is a sub-path of some
member of P. Moreover, if each member of P is a sub-path of some copy of C in G, then
k
G contains a Qs(cid:48) -graph where s(cid:48) = s − k.
k
Proof. We prove the first part of the lemma by induction on i. The statement clearly holds
for i = 2, as such a collection of paths is a banana graph. Let i > 2 and suppose the lemma
holds for smaller values of i. If there are s disjoint paths of length i between u and v then
13

we are done. So we may assume that there are at most s − 1 disjoint paths of length i
from u to v. The union of a set of disjoint paths of length i from u to v has at most si
vertices. Furthermore, every other u–v path of length i must intersect this set of vertices.
Therefore, there is a vertex w that is contained in at least (si)2i−3 of these paths. This
w can be in different positions in those paths, but there are at least (si)2i−4 paths where
w is the (p + 1)st vertex (counting from u) with 1 ≤ p < i. Then there are either at least
(si)2p−2 > (sp)2p−2 sub-paths of length p from u to w or at least (si)2(i−p)−2 > (s(i−p))2(i−p)−2
sub-paths of length i − p from w to v. Without loss of generality, suppose there are at least
(si)2p−2 > (sp)2p−2 sub-paths of length p from u to w. Then, by induction on this collection
of paths of length p < i, we find a banana graph Bs with main vertices u(cid:48),v(cid:48) together with
t
a u(cid:48)–u path and a v(cid:48)–w path (that are disjoint from each other). As there is a path from w
to v we have the desired subgraph B.
Now it remains to show that if each member of P is a sub-path of some copy of C in G,
k
Qs(cid:48)
then G contains a -graph. Suppose we have a graph B from the first part of the lemma.
k
Let C be a cycle of length k that contains any u–v path of length i in B. Note that C also
contains a u–v path P of length k − i. The internal vertices of P intersect at most k of the
internal paths of the banana graph Bs in B. Remove these internal paths from Bs and let
t t
B(cid:48) be the resulting subgraph of B. Now B(cid:48) together with P forms a Qs(cid:48) -graph.
k
Proof of Theorem 12. First let us suppose that F is a graph such that ex(n,C ,F) = o(n2).
k
Therefore, F must be a subgraph of every graph with Ω(n2) copies of C . It is easy to see
k
that each Rr-graph contains Ω(n2) copies of C . Thus, F is a subgraph of every Rr-graph.
k k k
The Fu¨redi graph F does not contain a copy of C and contains Ω(n2) copies of C for
q,2 4 k
k ≥ 5. Furthermore, F contains Ω(n2) copies of C . This follows from the proof of the
q,3 4
lower bound in Theorem 11. Therefore, when k ≥ 5 and r and q are large enough, F is a
subgraph of F . When k = 4, and r and q are large enough, F is a subgraph of F .
q,2 q,3
Claim 16. The graph F contains at most one cycle and it is of length k.
Proof. As F is a subgraph of Rr(2,0,2,k − 4), every cycle in F is of length k or 4. If k > 4,
k
as F is a subgraph of F , it does not contain cycles of length 4. Therefore, all cycles in F
q,2
are of length k.
Suppose there is more than one copy of C in F. For k = 4, as F is a subgraph of
k
Rr(2,0,2,0) it is easy to see that any two copies of C in F form a K or K . This
4 4 2,3 2,4
contradicts the fact that F is also a subgraph of F . For k = 5, as F is a subgraph of
q,3
Rr(2,0,3,0) it is easy to see that any two copies of C in F form a C or C . This contradicts
5 5 4 6
the fact that all cycles are of length k. For k > 5, as F is a subgraph of Rr(2,0,2,k − 4),
k
every pair of C s in F share k − 3 or k − 1 vertices. On the other hand, as F is a subgraph
k
of Rr(3,0,3,k − 6), every pair of C s in F share k − 4 or k − 2 vertices; a contradiction.
k k
We distinguish three cases based on the value of k.
Case 1: k = 4. The graph F is a subgraph of Rr(2,0,2,0). By Claim 16, F has at most
4
one cycle. The subgraphs of Rr(2,0,2,0) with at most one cycle are clearly subgraphs of
4
C∗∗2r.
4
14

Case 2: k = 5. The graph F is a subgraph of Rr(2,0,3,0) and therefore has at most 2
5
vertices of degree greater than 2 and they are non-adjacent. Furthermore, F is a subgraph
of Rr(2,0,2,1). By Claim 16, F has at most one cycle. The subgraphs of Rr(2,0,2,1) with
5 5
at most one cycle that are simultaneously subgraphs of Rr(2,0,3,0) are subgraphs of C∗∗2r.
5 5
Case 3: k > 5. First assume that F is a forest. As every Rr-graph contains Ω(n2) copies
k
of C , each must contain F as a subgraph. Therefore, F is an Fr-graph by definition.
k k
Now consider the remaining case when F contains a cycle C. As F is a subgraph of
Rr(2,0,2,k − 2), every edge of F is incident to C. If F has at least two vertices of degree
k
greater than 2 on C, then as F is a subgraph of both Rr(2,0,k − 2,0) and Rr(3,0,k − 3,0),
k k
we have that these two vertices should be at distance 2 and 3 from each other in F; a
contradiction. Thus, there is only one vertex of degree greater than 2 on C. Therefore, F is
a subgraph of C∗r.
k
This completes the first part of the proof that if F is a graph such that ex(n,C ,F) =
k
O(n), then F is as characterized in the theorem.
Now it remains to show that if F is as characterized in the theorem, then ex(n,C ,F) < cn
k
for some constant c. The constants k and r are given by the statement of the theorem. Fix
constants r(cid:48)(cid:48),r(cid:48),γ,c(cid:48),c in the given order such that each is large enough compared to k, r
and the previously fixed constants.
Let G be a vertex-minimal counterexample, i.e, G is an n-vertex graph with at least cn
copies of C and no copy of F such that n is minimal. We may assume every vertex in G is
k
contained in at least c copies of C , otherwise we can delete such a vertex (destroying fewer
k
than c copies of C ) to obtain a smaller counterexample.
k
Case 1: F contains a cycle. Thus, for k = 4,5 we have that F is a subgraph of C∗∗r and
k
for k > 5 we have that F is a subgraph of C∗r. If every vertex of G has degree at least 2r+k,
k
then on any C in G we can build a copy of C∗r or C∗∗r greedily. These graphs contain F;
k k k
a contradiction.
Now let x be a vertex of degree less than 2r + k. This implies that there is an edge xy
contained in at least c/(2r + k) copies of C . Therefore, there are at least c/(2r + k) x–y
k
paths of length k−1. As c is large enough compared to k and r, we may apply Lemma 15 to
this collection of paths of length k − 1 (each a subgraph of a C ) to get a Qr-graph Q. The
k k
graph Q contains C∗r when k > 5 and C∗∗r when k = 4,5. This implies that G contains F;
k k
a contradiction.
Case 2: F is a forest. Note that if k = 4,5, then F is a subgraph of C∗∗r, and we are
k
done by the same argument as in Case 1. Thus, we may assume k > 5.
Claim 17. Suppose G contains a collection C of at least c(cid:48)n copies of C . Then there is an
k
Qr(cid:48)
integer (cid:96) < k such that G contains a -graph Q with main vertices x,y and internal paths
k
of length (cid:96) such that less than c(cid:48)n members of C contain x,y at distance (cid:96).
Proof. We distinguish two cases.
Case 1: There exists two vertices u,v of G in at least c(cid:48)n members of C. Then there
are at least (c(cid:48)/k)n members of C that contain a u–v sub-path of length i < k. Let us
suppose that u and v are chosen such that i is minimal. Among these u–v paths of length
15

i we can find a collection P of (c(cid:48)/k)n/(ni) ≥ c(cid:48)/k2 of them that contain some fixed vertex
w (different from u and v) such that w is at distance j < i from u in each such u–v path.
Qr(cid:48)
Applying Lemma 15 this collection P of u–w paths of length j gives a -graph Q. Let x,y
k
be the main vertices of Q and let (cid:96) ≤ j < i be the length of the main paths in Q. By the
minimality of i, there are less than c(cid:48)n members of C that contain x,y at distance (cid:96).
Case 2: The graph G does not contain two vertices in c(cid:48)n members of C. As G is F-free
and F is a forest there are at most 2|V (F)|n edges in G. Thus, there is an edge uv contained
in at least c(cid:48)/(2|V (F)|) members of C. Let P be a collection of c(cid:48)/(2|V (F)|) u–v paths of
Qr(cid:48)
length k − 1 defined by these members of C. Applying Lemma 15 to P gives a -graph
k
Q. Let x,y be the main vertices of Q. By the assumption in Case 2, the vertices x,y are
contained in less than c(cid:48)n total copies of C in G.
k
Now let us apply Claim 17 repeatedly in the following way. Let C be the collection of
0
Qr(cid:48)
all cn copies of C in G. We may apply Claim 17 to C to find a -graph Q with main
k 0 k 1
vertices x ,y at distance (cid:96) in Q . Now remove from C the copies of C that contain x,y
1 1 1 1 0 k
at distance (cid:96) and let C be the remaining copies of C in C . Note that |C | ≥ (c − c(cid:48))n and
1 1 k 0 1
that none of the copies of C in Q are present in C . Repeating the argument above on C
k 1 1 1
Qr(cid:48)
in place of C gives another -graph Q with main vertices x ,y . We can continue this
0 k 2 2 2
argument until we have kγ different Qr(cid:48) -graphs (as c is large enough compared to c(cid:48)).
k
A pair of vertices x,y can appear as main vertices in at most k of the graphs Q ,Q ,...,Q .
1 2 kγ
Qr(cid:48)
Indeed, as once they appear as main vertices at distance (cid:96) ≤ k in some -graph we remove
k
all copies of C that have x,y at distance (cid:96). Therefore, there is a collection of γ = kγ/k
k
Qr(cid:48) Qr(cid:48)
different -graphs such that no two of the -graphs have the same two main vertices.
k k
Let Q(cid:48) ,Q(cid:48) ,...,Q(cid:48) be this collection of Qr(cid:48) -graphs.
1 2 γ k
The internal paths of any Q(cid:48) may share vertices with Q(cid:48) (for j (cid:54)= i). However, for r(cid:48) large
i j
enough compared to r(cid:48)(cid:48), we may remove internal paths from each of the Q(cid:48)s to construct a
i
collection of Qr(cid:48)(cid:48) -graphs Q(cid:48)(cid:48),Q(cid:48)(cid:48),...,Q(cid:48)(cid:48) such that each pair Q(cid:48)(cid:48), Q(cid:48)(cid:48) only share vertices on
k 1 2 γ i j
their respective main paths (for i (cid:54)= j).
Now let M ,M ,...,M be the collection of main paths of the Qr(cid:48)(cid:48) -graphs Q(cid:48)(cid:48),Q(cid:48)(cid:48),...,Q(cid:48)(cid:48).
1 2 γ k 1 2 γ
If there are two paths M and M that share at most one vertex, then we may apply Lemma 14
i j
to Q(cid:48)(cid:48) and Q(cid:48)(cid:48) to find a copy of F in G; a contradiction.
i j
So we may assume that each M shares at least two vertices with each other M . Recall
i j
that Q(cid:48)(cid:48) and Q(cid:48)(cid:48) share at most one of their main vertices. Therefore, there is a vertex u ∈ M
i j 1
that is contained in at least γ/k of the paths M ,M ,...,M . Moreover, u is the ith vertex
2 3 γ
in at least γ/k2 of those paths. Each of these paths contains another vertex from M . At
1
least γ/k3 of them contain the same vertex v, and it is the jth vertex in at least γ/k4 of
them. Thus, there are at least γ/k4 u–v paths of length |j − i|. As γ/k4 is large enough we
may apply Lemma 15 to this collection of u–v paths of length |j − i| to get a subgraph B
consisting of a banana graph Br (for some t < k) with main vertices u(cid:48),v(cid:48) together with a
t
u–u(cid:48) path and a v–v(cid:48) path. Each u–v path of B is a sub-path of some Q(cid:48)(cid:48). Pick any such
i
Q(cid:48)(cid:48) and take its union with B. The vertices of B intersect at most kr internal paths of Q(cid:48)(cid:48).
i i
As r(cid:48)(cid:48) is large enough compared to r, we may remove internal paths of Q(cid:48)(cid:48) that intersect the
i
vertices of B to get a graph containing an Rr-graph. As F is a subgraph of every Rr-graph,
k k
16

we have that G contains F; a contradiction.
5 Connection to Berge-hypergraphs
The problem of counting copies of a graph H in an n-vertex F-free graph is closely related to
the study of Berge hypergraphs. Generalizing the notion of hypergraph cycles due to Berge,
the authors introduced [18] the notion of Berge copies of any graph. Let F be a graph. We
say that a hypergraph H is a Berge-F if there is a bijection f : E(F) → E(H) such that
e ⊆ f(e) for every e ∈ E(F). Note that Berge-F actually denotes a class of hypergraphs.
The maximum number of hyperedges in an n-vertex hypergraph with no sub-hypergraph
isomorphic to any Berge-F is denoted ex(n,Berge-F). When we restrict ourselves to r-
uniform hypergraphs, this maximum is denoted ex (n,Berge-F).
r
Results of Gyo˝ri, Katona and Lemons [24] together with Davoodi, Gy˝ori, Methuku and
Tompkins [6] give tight bounds on ex (n,Berge-P ). Upper-bounds on ex (n,Berge-C ) are
r (cid:96) r (cid:96)
given by Gy˝ori and Lemons [25] when r ≥ 3. A brief survey of Tur´an-type results for
Berge-hypergraphs can be found in Subsection 5.2.2 in [19].
An early link between counting subgraphs and Berge-hypergraph problems was estab-
lished by Bollob´as and Gyo˝ri [4] who investigated both ex (n,Berge-C ) and ex(n,K ,C ).
3 5 3 5
The connection between these two parameters is also examined in two recent manuscripts
[16, 38]. In this section we prove two new relationships between these problems.
Proposition 18. Let F be a graph. Then
ex(n,K ,F) ≤ ex (n,Berge-F) ≤ ex(n,K ,F) + ex(n,F).
r r r
and
(cid:40) (cid:41)
n n
(cid:88) (cid:88)
ex(n,Berge-F) = max N(K ,G) ≤ ex(n,K ,F)
i i
G
i=0 i=0
where the maximum is over all n-vertex F-free graphs G.
Proof. Given an F-free graph G, let us construct a hypergraph H on the vertex set of G by
replacing each clique of G by a hyperedge containing exactly the vertices of that clique. The
hypergraph H contains no copy of a Berge-F. This gives ex(n,K ,F) ≤ ex (n,Berge-F) and
r r
(cid:40) (cid:41)
n
(cid:88)
max N(K ,G) ≤ ex(n,Berge-F)
i
G
i=0
where the maximum is over all n-vertex F-free graphs G.
Given an n-vertex hypergraph H with no Berge-F subhypergraph, we construct a graph
G on the vertex set of H as follows. Consider an order h ,...,h of the hyperedges of H
1 k
such that the hyperedges of size two appear first. We proceed through the hyperedges in
order and at each step try to choose a pair of vertices in h to be an edge in G. If no such
i
pair is available, then each pair of vertices in h is already adjacent in G. In this case, we
i
17

add no edge to G. A copy of F in G would correspond exactly to a Berge-F in H, so G is
F-free.
For each hyperedge h where we did not add an edge to G, there is a clique on the vertices
i
of h in G. Thus, the number of hyperedges of H is at most the number of cliques in G. If
i
H is r-uniform, then each hyperedge h of H corresponds to either an edge in G or a clique
i
K on the vertices of h (when we could not add an edge to G). Therefore, the number of
r i
hyperedges in H is at most ex(n,K ,F) + ex(n,F).
r
As in the case of traditional Tur´an numbers we may forbid multiple hypergraphs. In
particular, let ex (n,{Berge-F ,Berge-F ,...,Berge-F }) denote the maximum number of
r 1 2 k
hyperedges in an r-uniform n-vertex hypergraph with no subhypergraph isomorphic to any
Berge-F for all 1 ≤ i ≤ k. Similarly, ex(n,H,{F ,F ,...,F }) denotes the maximum
i 1 2 k
number of copies of the graph H in an n-vertex graph that contains no subgraph F for all
i
1 ≤ i ≤ k.
Proposition 19. For k ≥ 4,
ex (n,{Berge-C ,...,Berge-C }) = ex(n,K ,{C ,...,C }).
3 2 k 3 4 k
Proof. Let H be an n-vertex 3-uniform hypergraph with no Berge-C for i = 2,3,...,k and
i
the maximum number of hyperedges. Consider the graph G on the vertex set of H where a
pair of vertices are adjacent if and only if they are contained in a hyperedge of H. As H is
C -free (i.e., each pair of hyperedges share at most one vertex) each edge of G is contained
2
in exactly one hyperedge of H.
Each hyperedge of H contributes a triangle to G. We claim that G contains no other
cycles of length i for i = 3,4,5,...,k. That is, G contains no cycle with two edges coming
from different hyperedges of H. Suppose (to the contrary) that G does contain such a cycle
C. If two edges of C come from the same hyperedge, then they are incident in C. Therefore,
these two edges can be replaced by the edge between their disjoint endpoints (which is
contained in the same hyperedge) to get a shorter cycle. We may repeat this process until
we are left with a cycle such that each edge comes from a different hyperedge of H. Then
this cycle corresponds exactly to a Berge-cycle of at most k hyperedges in H; a contradiction.
Thus, ex (n,{Berge-C ,...,Berge-C }) ≤ ex(n,K ,{C ,...,C }).
3 2 k 3 4 k
On the other hand, let G be an n-vertex graph with no cycle C ,C ,...,C and the
4 5 k
maximum number of triangles. Construct a hypergraph H on the vertex set of G where the
hyperedges of H are the triangles of G. The graph G is C -free, so each pair of triangles
4
share at most one vertex, i.e., H contains no Berge-C . If H contains a Berge-C , then it is
2 3
easy to see that G contains a C ; a contradiction.
4
Therefore, if H contains any Berge-C for i = 4,...,k, then G contains a cycle C ; a
i i
contradiction. Thus, ex (n,{Berge-C ,...,Berge-C }) ≥ ex(n,K ,{C ,...,C }).
3 2 k 3 4 k
1+ 1
Alon and Shikhelman [1] showed that for every k > 3, ex(n,K ,{C ,...,C }) ≥ Ω(n ).
k−1
3 4 k
For k = 4 they showed that ex (n,K ,C ) = (1 + o(1))1n3/2. Lazebnik and Verstra¨ete [33]
3 3 4
6
proved ex (n,{Berge-C ,Berge-C ,Berge-C }) = (1 + o(1))1n3/2. By Proposition 19 these
3 2 3 4
6
two statements are equivalent.
18

6 Acknowledgments
The first author is supported in part by the Ja´nos Bolyai Research Fellowship of the Hun-
garian Academy of Sciences and the National Research, Development and Innovation Office
– NKFIH under the grants K 116769, KH 130371 and SNN 12936.
References
[1] N. Alon, C. Shikhelman, Many T copies in H-free graphs. Journal of Combinatorial
Theory, Series B 121 (2016) 146–172.
[2] B. Bolloba´s, On complete subgraphs of different orders. Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos.
Soc. 79 (1976) 19–24.
[3] B. Bollob´as, Modern Graph Theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 184. Springer-
Verlag, New York, 1998. xiv+394 pp. ISBN: 0-387-98488-7
[4] B. Bolloba´s, E. Gy˝ori, Pentagons vs. triangles. Discrete Mathematics 308 (2008) 4332-
4336.
[5] J. Cutler, J. Nir, J. Radclifee, Supersaturation for subgraph counts. arXiv:1903.08059
(2019).
[6] A. Davoodi, E. Gy˝ori, A. Methuku, C. Tompkins, An Erdo˝s-Gallai type theorem for
uniform hypergraphs. European Journal of Combinatorics 69 (2018) 159–162.
[7] P. Erdo˝s, On the number of complete subgraphs contained in certain graphs. Magyar
Tud. Akad. Mat. Kutat´oInt. K¨ozl. 7 (1962) 459–464.
[8] P. Erdo˝s, Problems and results in graph theory and combinatorial analysis, Proceed-
ings of the Fifth British Combinatorial Conference (Univ. Aberdeen, Aberdeen, 1975),
Congress. Numer. XV , pp. 169–192, Utilitas Math., Winnipeg, Man., 1976 MR53
#13006; Zentralblatt 335.05002.
[9] P. Erdo˝s, On some problems in graph theory, combinatorial analysis and combinatorial
number theory. Graph Theory and Combinatorics, Proc. Conf. Hon. P. Erd˝os, Cam-
bridge 1983 (1984) 1–17.
[10] P. Erdo˝s, A. R´enyi, On the evolution of random graphs. Magyar Tud. Akad. Mat.
Kutat´oInt. K¨ozl. 5 (1960) 17–61.
[11] B. Ergemlidze, E. Gyo˝ri, A. Methuku, N. Salia, A note on the maximum number of
triangles in a C -free graph. Electronic Notes in Discrete Mathematics 61 (2017) 395–
5
398.
19

[12] Z. Fu¨redi. New asymptotics for bipartite Tur´an numbers. Journal of Combinatorial
Theory, Series A, 75 (1996) 141–144.
[13] Z. Fu¨redi, M. Simonovits, The history of degenerate (bipartite) extremal graph prob-
lems. Erd˝os Centennial. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, (2013) 169–264.
[14] D. Gerbner, E. Gy˝ori, A. Methuku, M. Vizer, Generalized Tura´n problems for even
cycles. arXiv:1712.07079 (2017).
[15] D. Gerbner, B. Keszegh, C. Palmer, B. Patko´s, On the number of cycles in a graph with
restricted cycle lengths. SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics 32 (2018) 266–279.
[16] D. Gerbner, A. Methuku, M. Vizer, Asymptotics for the Tura´n number of Berge-K .
2,t
Journal of Combinatorial theory, Series B 137 (2019) 264–290.
[17] D. Gerbner, A. Methuku, M. Vizer, Generalized Tura´n problems for disjoint copies of
graphs. arXiv:1712.07072 (2017).
[18] D. Gerbner, C. Palmer, Extremal Results for Berge Hypergraphs. SIAM Journal on
Discrete Mathematics 31 (2017) 2314–2327.
[19] D. Gerbner, B. Patk´os. Extremal Finite Set Theory, 1st Edition, CRC Press, 2018.
[20] L. Gishboliner, A. Shapira, A Generalized Tur´an Problem and its Applications. Pro-
ceedings of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (2018)
760–772.
[21] A. Grzesik, On the maximum number of five-cycles in a triangle-free graph. Journal of
Combinatorial Theory, Series B, 102 (2012) 1061–1066.
[22] A. Grzesik, B. Kielak, On the maximum number of odd cycles in graphs without smaller
odd cycles, arXiv:1806.09953 (2018).
[23] E. Gyo˝ri, On the number of C ’s in a triangle-free graph. Combinatorica 9 (1989) 101–
5
102.
[24] E. Gyo˝ri, G. Y. Katona, N. Lemons, Hypergraph extensions of the Erdo˝s-Gallai Theo-
rem, European Journal of Combinatorics 58 (2016) 238–246.
[25] E. Gy˝ori, N. Lemons, Hypergraphs with no cycle of a given length. Combinatorics,
Probability and Computing 21 (2012) 193–201.
[26] E. Gy˝ori, J. Pach, M. Simonovits, On the maximal number of certain subgraphs in
K -free graphs, Graphs and Combinatorics 7 (1991) 31–37.
r
[27] E. Gyo˝ri, H. Li, The maximum number of triangles in C -free graphs. Combinatorics,
2k+1
Probability and Computing 21 (2011) 187–191.
20

[28] H. Hatami, J. Hladky´, D. Kra´l’, S. Norine, A. Razborov. On the number of pentagons
in triangle-free graphs. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A 120 (2013) 722–732.
[29] G.O.H. Katona, A theorem for finite sets. Theory of Graphs, Proc. Colloq., Tihany,
1966, Academic Press, New York, (1968) 187–207.
[30] A. Kostochka, D. Mubayi and J. Verstra¨ete, Tura´n problems and shadows III: expan-
sions of graphs, SIAM Journal on Discrete Math. 29 (2015) 868–876.
[31] T. K˝ova´ri, V. So´s, P. Tur´an, On a problem of K. Zarankiewicz. In Colloquium Mathe-
maticae Vol. 3, No. 1, (1954) 50–57.
[32] J. Kruskal. The optimal number of simplices in a complex. Mathematical Optimization
Techniques (1963) 251–268.
[33] F. Lazebnik, J. Verstra¨ete, On hypergraphs of girth five. Electronic Journal of Combi-
natorics 10 (2003) #R25.
[34] S. Letzter, Many H-copies in graphs with a forbidden tree. arXiv:1811.04287 (2018).
[35] L. Lov´asz, Combinatorial Problems and Exercises. Akad´emiai Kiado´, North Holland,
1979.
[36] Jie Ma and Yu Qiu, Some sharp results on the generalized Tura´n numbers.
arXiv:1802.01091 (2018).
[37] I. W. Moon, L. Moser, On a problem of Tura´n. Magyar Tud. Akad. Mat. Kutat´oInt.
K¨ozl. 7 (1962) 311–314.
[38] C. Palmer, M. Tait, C. Timmons, A. Z. Wagner, Tura´n numbers for Berge-hypergraphs
and related extremal problems. Discrete Mathematics 342 (2019) 1553–1563.
[39] A. A. Zykov, On some properties of linear complexes. Matematicheskii sbornik, 66 (1949)
163–188.
21