Available online at   https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7497857  ISSN (Online): 2958-440X 
 
 
The Effect of Social Media Technology on Politics and Democracy: The Case Study of Somalia. 
 
Dahir Ahmed Hassan1
 
 
 
Received, 26 October 2022  Accepted, 5 November 2022  Available Online, 01 January 2023 
 
 
 
1Daha International University, 
*Author for CorrespondenceORCID ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3034-9727; email: dyoolax@gmail.com 
 
The Effect of Social Media Technology on Politics and Democracy: The Case Study of Somalia. 
Dahir Ahmed Hassan* 
ABSTRACT 
That the internet, one of the communication technologies, has been developing continuously since the 
past. With the widespread use of computers, the frequency of use of the Internet has also increased. 
The  features  that  the  internet  has  gained  with  this  evolutionary  transformation  has  led  to  the 
expansion  of  the  usage  areas  of  the  internet.  The  evolution  process  of  the  Internet  led  to  the 
emergence of social media channels in the 2000s.  
With  the  introduction  of  smart  mobile  phones  into  our  lives,  social  media  has  become  an 
indispensable part of human life. Today, social media tools, which are widely used all over the world, 
play an effective role in determining the consumption habits of individuals, their place in society and 
their daily lives. Among the features that social media brings to its users, being organized, instant 
communication,  sending  feedback  and  creating  a  friend  network  have  also  changed  political 
participation practices. In recent years, social media networks have played an important role in many 
social movements.   

| The Effect of Social Media Technology on Politics and Democracy: The Case Study of Somalia.             |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Dahir Ahmed Hassan*                                                                                     |
| ABSTRACT                                                                                                |
| That the internet, one of the communication technologies, has been developing continuously since the    |
| past. With the widespread use of computers, the frequency of use of the Internet has also increased.    |
| The features that the internet has gained with this evolutionary transformation has led to the          |
| expansion of the usage areas of the internet. The evolution process of the Internet led to the          |
| emergence of social media channels in the 2000s.                                                        |
| With the introduction of smart mobile phones into our lives, social media has become an                 |
| indispensable part of human life. Today, social media tools, which are widely used all over the world,  |
| play an effective role in determining the consumption habits of individuals, their place in society and |
| their daily lives. Among the features that social media brings to its users, being organized, instant   |
| communication, sending feedback and creating a friend network have also changed political               |
| participation practices. In recent years, social media networks have played an important role in many   |
| social movements.                                                                                       |

Daha International University Academic Journal  Vol. 2, No. 1, 2023  diuaj.com 
(DIUAJ) 
 
In the study, the data obtained by the questionnaire method created in google form from a sample of 
424 people were analyzed with the SPSS program and the results were interpreted. Participants in this 
study have strongly demonstrated that social media has a strong influence on politics and democracy, 
and has also increased the awareness and following of the Somali people about the situation in the 
country therefore Social media prevents dictatorship and supports the implementation of democracy. 
In  the  same  way,  according  to  the  results,  in  the  last  political  elections,  the  political  success  of 
Somalis and their reputation in the society was influenced or determined by social media.  
Keywords: Social Media, Political Propaganda, Democracy, Political Participation. 
 
Introduction 
Today, it is accepted that one of the important elements in the formation of public opinion is social 
media. Social media that directs and influences  the political attitudes of individuals. Media effect 
fields each last day is expanding.  Social media its main feature is that it can spread comments and 
events to very large masses in a short time and thus have the opportunity to direct the thoughts of the 
masses.   
beyond on the side each individual access able to provide social media channels, individuals with the 
political  environment  relating  to  contents  to  create,  this  your  content  to  be  shared  and  allows 
interpretation.  Thanks  to  this  communication,  politicians  are  able  to  reach  the  voters.  With  social 
media  forums  created  in  the  form  of  questions  and  answers,  politicians  have  the  opportunity  to 
perceive voter expectations and determine their election campaigns accordingly has done. 
Realizing the importance of social media, which is one of the new communication tools, politicians 
have started to carry out social media channels with professional support or individually. Because 
social  media  is  now  the  most  effective  communication  tool  used  for  propaganda,  public  opinion, 
political campaigns, information and promotion. Social media, which is used as a means of political 
communication and democratic participation in the USA, the Western world and the rest of the world, 
is also increasing its influence in Somalia. 
Today, social media is a resource that conveys all political messages to citizens, political ideologies 
and  political  agenda,  social  media  through  to  societies  is  transmitted.  With  the  advancement  of 
technology, people are aware of all the developments in the world and have the opportunity to get 
information about the political events happening all over the world.  
  46 

| In the study, the data obtained by the questionnaire method created in google form from a sample of   |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 424 people were analyzed with the SPSS program and the results were interpreted. Participants in this |
| study have strongly demonstrated that social media has a strong influence on politics and democracy,  |
| and has also increased the awareness and following of the Somali people about the situation in the    |
| country therefore Social media prevents dictatorship and supports the implementation of democracy.    |
| In the same way, according to the results, in the last political elections, the political success of  |
| Somalis and their reputation in the society was influenced or determined by social media.             |
| Keywords: Social Media, Political Propaganda, Democracy, Political Participation.                     |

| Today, it is accepted that one of the important elements in the formation of public opinion is social   |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| media. Social media that directs and influences the political attitudes of individuals. Media effect    |
| fields each last day is expanding. Social media its main feature is that it can spread comments and     |
| events to very large masses in a short time and thus have the opportunity to direct the thoughts of the |
| masses.                                                                                                 |
| beyond on the side each individual access able to provide social media channels, individuals with the   |
| political environment relating to contents to create, this your content to be shared and allows         |
| interpretation. Thanks to this communication, politicians are able to reach the voters. With social     |
| media forums created in the form of questions and answers, politicians have the opportunity to          |
| perceive voter expectations and determine their election campaigns accordingly has done.                |
| Realizing the importance of social media, which is one of the new communication tools, politicians      |
| have started to carry out social media channels with professional support or individually. Because      |
| social media is now the most effective communication tool used for propaganda, public opinion,          |
| political campaigns, information and promotion. Social media, which is used as a means of political     |
| communication and democratic participation in the USA, the Western world and the rest of the world,     |
| is also increasing its influence in Somalia.                                                            |
| Today, social media is a resource that conveys all political messages to citizens, political ideologies |
| and political agenda, social media through to societies is transmitted. With the advancement of         |
| technology, people are aware of all the developments in the world and have the opportunity to get       |
| information about the political events happening all over the world.                                    |

Daha International University Academic Journal  Vol. 2, No. 1, 2023  diuaj.com 
(DIUAJ) 
 
 SOCIAL MEDIA CONCEPT 
Accepted definition of social media. However, the concept of social media and "Web 2.0” are often 
used interchangeably. While “Web 2.0” deals with the phenomenon from a technological point of 
view, the concept of social media explains the phenomenon with its sociological dimension (Akar, 
2011, p. 21). Social media, Bruns and Bahnisch, "wide in the sense “Web 2.0” technologies over 
established, enabling deeper social interaction, and community building, and achieving collaboration 
projects providing web sites” shaped defines (Acikel and Celikol, 2012: 43). “Social media in Kaplan 
and Haenlein's (2010) definition in Wikipedia: “Web It is the whole of the Internet-based applications 
that allow the production and development of ideological and technological contents and structures on 
2.0 in a user-centered manner. However, it can be said that social media is a concept that emerges as a 
result of the shares contents and dialogues that people create on the internet.  
Today social media with friendship, sharing, freedom, Fame, security as many concepts take on new 
meanings.  Virtual  media  shares  in  the  environment  Maintained  relationships  and  virtual  freedoms 
also  cause  reality  to  gain  a  new  dimension.  In  addition,  social  media  it  offers  people  unlimited 
freedom against the media (Okmeydan, 2013, p. 53). 
In  a study by Vural and Bat (2010) with Ege University students, social media use rate of youth 
between increasingly widespread was found to be. According to the results of the research , all of the 
students used, 67.4 % of each day to the internet entered, 85.9% of any a social network member is, It 
was determined that 69% of them wrote comments on social networks (Okmeydan, 2013, p. 54). 
Social media is nowadays in terms of delivering the right content to the right person. Seen as an 
important marketing area. In traditional media, it is expected that a broadcast will reach millions of 
people without aiming to reach the right person. Through social media, institutions have the chance to 
communicate with millions of people. (Okmeydan, 2013, p. 54). In this context, social media is what 
traditional media does of the process full reverse carries out. Individuals TV, printed media or they 
want to see the publications they are interested in and the content related to them in the internet media. 
For example, while individuals use e-commerce sites such as "Sahibinden " and "Gitti Gidiyor " in 
line with their own interests, all social platforms can send the right advertisement to the right person, 
as they store demographic characteristics of their members such as gender, region of residence and 
age in their data banks. ( Okmeydan , 2013,p.54) like this social media platform users to the site each 
when they enter own may encounter advertisements according to age, gender and interests. In the 
internet environment that has become specific in this way, social media has a place in people's lives 
with its sociological dimensions as well as its economic dimensions.  
2.1.1.  Social media tools 
  47 

Daha International University Academic Journal  Vol. 2, No. 1, 2023  diuaj.com 
(DIUAJ) 
 
When social media tools, which are increasing day by day, are examined in terms of their content and 
functions, it is seen that they have a comprehensive area. For this reason, in this study, similar to the 
features owner of your sites classification has been made. (Corner, 2018, p. 22) 
The classification of Social Media tools is as follows (Bostancı, 2015, p. 58); 
"Social networks” 
“Blogs” 
“Microblogs” 
“Wikis” 
“Podcasts” 
“Media Sharing Sites” 
“Social News Sites” 
“Internet Forums” 
“Virtual Worlds” 
“Social News and Social Marking Sites” (Bostancı, 2015, p. 58). 
SOCIAL MEDIA AND POLITICS RELATIONSHIP 
In the conditions of mass society, political relations need to be reproduced. Technology aspect on the 
agenda  including  the  one  which...  social  media,  to  the  strength  despite  law  to  establish  a  special 
relationship with politicians, as they do not have the authority to has to. Social media, availability 
known of your strength most durable base, with politics it is the power that the relationship between 
them gives him. It is important for the society to act and freedom is discourse, social media your 
presence right of the reasons one of them (Damlapınar, 2008, p. 200). 
There is an existential unity between social media and politics. While political actors want to make 
their voices heard, social media encodes political actors as easy-to-access news sources. When the 
subject is examined from this point of view, the needs of both show the same. How the institutions 
and individuals with whom social media is involved should conduct their relations related sanction 
the one which... rules available. (Celebrities, 2006, s. 5). This In this case, the relationship between 
social media and politics progresses in the form of mutual relations, depending on the wishes of both 
sides.  In  practice,  it  is  seen  that  the  two  parties  generally  have  good  relations  with  each  other. 
Objections or complaints only arise when the interests of one of the two parties are touched or when 
they enter the field of action of the other. It is politics, not social media that determines the boundaries 
of a beneficial relationship between them. Therefore, it can be stated that the development of social 
media is based on the existing political system (Akdağ, 2014, p. 2). 
Managers, who know that social media is powerful in influencing individuals, have kept the control 
  48 

Daha International University Academic Journal  Vol. 2, No. 1, 2023  diuaj.com 
(DIUAJ) 
 
of the media in their hands in order to come to power and maintain their power from past to present 
(Uzun, 2014, p. 130). As long as political actors get the support of individuals, social media will not 
want to act against this situation. When they act against political power, they will be affected by many 
political decisions. Today, written and image media effect and location in terms of power owner to be 
and  politics  on  effective  being  with  its  feature,  parties  and  politicians  social  media  with  their 
relationship cares (Light, 2009, p.56). Today, social Because of the influence of the media and their 
important role in politics, political parties and politicians attach importance to their relations with 
social media. The media, which is seen as the fourth force, is a shelter for politicians, a place to live, 
struggle made one by one arena into has arrived. Social media political in this sense, it is a tool that is 
capable of providing political approval, providing and maintaining power and power (Çebi, 2002, p. 
one). 
Today, your politics own in the lane to walk providing most important one of the developments also, 
social media tools all in its glory emerge is the output (Trucker, 1998, s. 160). Social media effect, 
vote during the periods more     open a way is seen. Politicians prefer to use social media to reach 
voters (Sağnak, 1996, p. 283). Another issue during election periods is the presence of undecided 
voters. In this context, the issue of which party the undecided voter will vote for is based on the 
information obtained from the social media. According to Brown, propaganda aimed at influencing 
the behavior and attitudes of the public is the target audience. At this point, the language used for the 
audience is very important. With social media tools, messages are conveyed to the audience with 
words  or  other  symbols.  In  other  words,  propaganda  is  applied  in  the  political  arena  in  the  most 
effective and clear way (Bostancı, 1998, p. 138-140). 
As a result, the relationship between politics and social media is stated as the relationship of common 
life. Social media sees it as a source of political news; political actors, on the other hand, aim to 
convey their attitudes and thoughts to the society. Both need each other to survive. This relationship is 
not just based on economic reasons.  In addition to economic reasons, it is also dependent on the 
media due to the need for "raw material" (Arslan, 2005, p. 6).     
 
DEMOCRATIC PARTICIPATION IN SOCIAL MEDIA PROCESS 
It is known that social media is an important tool in increasing and spreading the desire for freedom 
and  democracy  among  people  all  over  the  world.  People  in  underdeveloped  or  underdeveloped 
countries  have  the  opportunity  to  learn  about  democratic  developments  in  developed  countries 
through social media. In this case, it caused riots and protests. In addition, social media has increased 
the communication between the politician and the society. Therefore, the demands for freedom and 
  49 

Daha International University Academic Journal  Vol. 2, No. 1, 2023  diuaj.com 
(DIUAJ) 
 
democracy have increased (Çildan and Ertemiz et al., 2012, p. 8). 
The  young  population,  who  use  technology  well  in  the  transition  to  participatory  democracy,  can 
carry the political participation path they have opened through social media to a global dimension. 
We can explain the young people's becoming politically active on a global scale with the example of 
the Occupation of Wall Street (Gürbüz, 2014, p. 98); 
It is a social movement formed on September 17, 2011 by the Canadian activist group Adbusters on 
Wall  Street  in  New  York.  The  purpose  of  this  movement  is  to  protest  unemployment,  social 
inequality and the wealthy part of the population. The majority of the protesters are young people. 
The protest, as in the Arab uprisings, took place on Twitter and on facebook individuals a together to 
come  why  has  been  Situation  America  It  has  gained  support  in  many  countries.  Simultaneously, 
protests took place in front of the world stock markets (Gürbüz, 2014, p. 98). 
3.1.1.  Cyber in Social Media Democracy 
Direct participation in cyber-democracy without the internet, that is, without cyberspace possible is 
not. A virtual network environment formation as a result, network Considering that the users involved 
in the environment reflect the common thoughts of the society, cyber democracy aims to expand the 
application area of direct democracy and increase participation (Gürbüz, 2014, p. 99). 
Considering that the widest and fastest participation in the decision-making mechanism will occur 
from the media; it can be said that social media, which has fast feedback and interaction features, is 
the most important structure of direct participation. Through the platforms to be created in the social 
media, the participation of the people will take place in the cyber space, the application area will be in 
the constitutional order or in the political structures. Considering that the Internet reaches as far as 
mobile phones or tablets and even watches, participation will expand socially can be said. Today yet 
Location acquired a system if not in, It finds application area in some subjects in northern countries 
(Gürbüz, 2014, p.99-100). 
 
In 1944, Iceland had an unaltered constitution, which was established by secession from Denmark and 
was based on the Danish constitution. After the economic crisis in the country in 2008, a common 
idea  was  determined  for  the  creation  of  a  new  constitution.  The  constitution  was  drafted  by  the 
Icelandic people, by a 25-member council, all of whom were Icelandic citizens. This draft constitution 
was shared with the public through the Icelandic Constitutional Council's Twitter, Flicker, Facebook, 
YouTube and websites, and the referendum was held online through these social networks. Citizens 
made suggestions from their social media accounts for the draft constitution in the online process, and 
these suggestions were examined by a local committee, constitution council by evaluated. Beyond on 
the side a citizen's draft for   made proposal, other a citizen by can be seen and 
  50 

Daha International University Academic Journal  Vol. 2, No. 1, 2023  diuaj.com 
(DIUAJ) 
 
interpreted(Apaydın, 2011). This allowed the proposal to be modified before it reached the council. 
214 As a result, the new constitution was arranged according to the criticisms and suggestions of the 
people. The commission opened the new constitution to the public on Twitter, Youtube, Facebook 
and other social networking sites, and the articles were reshaped according to public criticism. In 
addition, the committee meetings, which have been held every week since April, have been broadcast 
live on Facebook. 215 This constitution, which was made through social media in Iceland, is the first 
example in the world both as a whole with the suggestions of the people and as an online constitution 
(Cinmen, 2011). 
That regional differences are minimal and the population is low is an important factor in the drafting 
of the constitution. In countries where the population is dense and the number of internet users is high, 
it will be difficult to prepare the online constitution draft together with the citizens, as in the example 
of Iceland. Providing online participation can allow for large mass democratic participation, but if 
these  democratic  participation  mechanisms  are  supported  by  political  actors,  direct  participation 
opens up or cyber democracy legitimizes participatory democracy in terms of society (Gürbüz, 2014, 
pp. 100-101). 
Cyber democracy; It can also find application areas through electronic signatur 
Social media usage level in Somalia 
It is viewed from the side of the politicians if they were opposition and conservative and from the side 
of the most influential journalists in terms of the use of social media. It will only be looked at in terms 
of Facebook and Twitter, the two most used social media types by politicians.  
 
Social Media Usage Level of Former Presidents and Current President 
 
1.  Former presidents and current presidents at the federal level 
 
Title               Name  Facebook  Twitter followers 
followers 
Former President  Abdi Kasim Salad Hassan  Unknown  unknown 
Former President  Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed  362k  89.5K 
Former President  Mohamed Abdullahi Farmaajo  IM  759K 
Current president  Hassan Sheikh Mohamud  578k  193K 
   
 
2.  Current presidents at the regional state level 
 
Title       Name  Facebook  Twitter 
followers  followers 
  51 

| Title   | None              | None   | Name                       | None                       | None   |      | Facebook   |    | Twitter followers   | None    | None   |
|:--------|:------------------|:-------|:---------------------------|:---------------------------|:-------|:-----|:-----------|:---|:--------------------|:--------|:-------|
|         |                   |        |                            |                            |        |      | followers  |    |                     |         |        |
|         | Former President  |        |                            | Abdi Kasim Salad Hassan    |        |      | Unknown    |    |                     | unknown |        |
|         | Former President  |        | Sheikh Sharif Sheikh Ahmed |                            |        | 362k |            |    | 89.5K               |         |        |
|         | Former President  |        |                            | Mohamed Abdullahi Farmaajo |        |      | IM         |    |                     | 759K    |        |
|         | Current president |        | Hassan Sheikh Mohamud      |                            |        | 578k |            |    | 193K                |         |        |

| Title   | Name   |    | Facebook   |    |    | Twitter   |    |
|:--------|:-------|:---|:-----------|:---|:---|:----------|:---|
|         |        |    | followers  |    |    | followers |    |

Daha International University Academic Journal  Vol. 2, No. 1, 2023  diuaj.com 
(DIUAJ) 
 
President at Putland  Said Abdullahi Deni  294K  4,140k 
President at Jubaland  Ahmed Sheikh Mohamed Islam  169K  62.5k 
President at Koofur-Galbeed   Abdiaziz Hassan Mohamed Laftagareen  136K  88.4K 
President at Galmudug  Ahmed Abdi Karie Qoorqoor  193k  78.9K 
President at Hirshabeele   Ali Gudlawe Hussein  62K  22.9K 
President at Somaliland   Muse Bihi Abdi  320K  162.4K 
 
 
 
DATA AND ANALYSIS RESULTS  
 
The research is based on a descriptive study. In order to reveal the effect of social media use on 
politics  and  democracy,  the  participants  were  asked  questions  prepared  via  Google  Form.  In  this 
context, apart from demographic data, a separate scale has been prepared, stating that social media 
has an impact on the political decisions of Somali politicians and the country's democracy journey.  In 
the study, was carried out with 424 participants with the survey created via Google Form. The data 
obtained analyzed with the SPSS program and the results of the study are as follows.  
 
Table1: Demographic status of the participants 
  1. Age Distribution 
  Total  424 
 
24-29  207 
   
30-39  96 
 
40-49  68 
   
50 and above  53 
 
   
 
2.Gender Distribution 
 
Total   
 
  Male  348 
Female  74 
As  it  can  be  understood from 
   
3.Education Level Distribution 
the  table  above,  when  the 
Total   
characteristics  of  the 
Bachelor’s degree  290 
participants  in  Master Degree  126    this  study  are 
Doctorate      8 
considered,  it  shows  that  they 
consist of men and women aged 24 and over and all of them are university graduates, which shows 
the importance given to the study.   
 
 
 
 
  52 

|    | President at Putland        |    |                            | Said Abdullahi Deni                 |    |      | 294K   |    |        | 4,140k   |    |
|:---|:----------------------------|:---|:---------------------------|:------------------------------------|:---|:-----|:-------|:---|:-------|:---------|:---|
|    | President at Jubaland       |    | Ahmed Sheikh Mohamed Islam |                                     |    | 169K |        |    | 62.5k  |          |    |
|    | President at Koofur-Galbeed |    |                            | Abdiaziz Hassan Mohamed Laftagareen |    |      | 136K   |    |        | 88.4K    |    |
|    | President at Galmudug       |    | Ahmed Abdi Karie Qoorqoor  |                                     |    | 193k |        |    | 78.9K  |          |    |
|    | President at Hirshabeele    |    |                            | Ali Gudlawe Hussein                 |    |      | 62K    |    |        | 22.9K    |    |
|    | President at Somaliland     |    | Muse Bihi Abdi             |                                     |    | 320K |        |    | 162.4K |          |    |

|                                | 1. Age Distribution   | None   | None   | None   |    |
|:-------------------------------|:----------------------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:---|
|                                | Total                 |        |        | 424    |    |
| 24-29                          |                       |        | 207    |        |    |
|                                | 30-39                 |        |        | 96     |    |
| 40-49                          |                       |        | 68     |        |    |
|                                | 50 and above          |        |        | 53     |    |
|                                |                       |        |        |        |    |
|                                | 2.Gender Distribution |        |        |        |    |
| Total                          |                       |        |        |        |    |
|                                | Male                  |        |        | 348    |    |
| Female                         |                       |        | 74     |        |    |
|                                |                       |        |        |        |    |
| 3.Education Level Distribution |                       |        |        |        |    |
|                                | Total                 |        |        |        |    |
| Bachelor’s degree              |                       |        | 290    |        |    |
|                                | Master Degree         |        |        | 126    |    |
| Doctorate                      |                       |        | 8      |        |    |

Daha International University Academic Journal  Vol. 2, No. 1, 2023  diuaj.com 
(DIUAJ) 
 
Table 2:  Social media influences Somali politics 
Index  Number  Percentage 
Total  424  100% 
Absolutely  Agree  326  77% 
  Agree  64  15% 
Neutral  13  3% 
strongly disagree  21  5% 
 
When looking at the answers given by the participants of this study, whether social media has an 
effect  on  Somali  politics  or  not.    The  response  given  by  the  majority  of  participants  was  77% 
``Absolutely Agree'' and 15% `` Agree`` which means that 92% of the respondents agree, showing the 
strong influence of social media on the politics of our country.        
Table 3:  Social media have an impact on Somali politicians' political decisions 
Index  Number  Percentage 
Total  424  100% 
Absolutely  Agree  309  73% 
  Agree  89  21% 
Neutral  13  3% 
strongly disagree  13  3% 
 
 
94% (73% ``Absolutely Agree'' + 21% ``Agree'') of the participants in this study on whether or not 
social media has an influence on the decisions of Somali politicians agreed that social media directs 
political decisions. This answer is consistent with the answer given that social media has an influence 
on  the  politics  of  Somalia,  because  if  it  has  an  influence  on  the  politics,  it  can  be  expected  to 
influence  the  decisions.      For  this  reason,  it  is  important  for  politicians  to  analyze  the  political 
decision they can take by first learning the opinion of the public about the decision they want to take. 
 
Table 4:   Social media has an impact on Somalia's democratization 
Index  Number  Percentage 
Total  424  100% 
Absolutely  Agree  348  82% 
  Agree  51  12% 
Neutral  8  2% 
strongly disagree  17  4% 
   
Democracy  is  the  result  of  good  politics,  and  good  politics  reflects  the  needs  of  citizens.  If  the 
political leader is sensitive to listening to his community, he is guided by the opinion and needs of the 
community,  and  the  public  opinion  is  considered  as  a  democratic  example.  At  this  time  when 
technology is advancing, the implementation of democracy is greatly helped by social media. When 
424 people who participated in the study were asked about the impact of social media on democracy, 
399 people, which is equivalent to 94% of the people who participated in this study answered that 
  53 

|    | Index             |    |    |   Number |    |    | Percentage   |    |
|:---|:------------------|:---|:---|---------:|:---|:---|:-------------|:---|
|    | Total             |    |    |      424 |    |    | 100%         |    |
|    | Absolutely Agree  |    |    |          |    |    |              |    |
|    | Agree             |    |    |       64 |    |    | 15%          |    |
|    | Neutral           |    |    |          |    |    |              |    |
|    | strongly disagree |    |    |       21 |    |    | 5%           |    |

|    | Index             |    |    |   Number |    |    | Percentage   |    |
|:---|:------------------|:---|:---|---------:|:---|:---|:-------------|:---|
|    | Total             |    |    |      424 |    |    | 100%         |    |
|    | Absolutely Agree  |    |    |          |    |    |              |    |
|    | Agree             |    |    |       89 |    |    | 21%          |    |
|    | Neutral           |    |    |          |    |    |              |    |
|    | strongly disagree |    |    |       13 |    |    | 3%           |    |

|    | Index             |    |    |   Number |    |    | Percentage   |    |
|:---|:------------------|:---|:---|---------:|:---|:---|:-------------|:---|
|    | Total             |    |    |      424 |    |    | 100%         |    |
|    | Absolutely Agree  |    |    |          |    |    |              |    |
|    | Agree             |    |    |       51 |    |    | 12%          |    |
|    | Neutral           |    |    |          |    |    |              |    |
|    | strongly disagree |    |    |       17 |    |    | 4%           |    |

Daha International University Academic Journal  Vol. 2, No. 1, 2023  diuaj.com 
(DIUAJ) 
 
social media has recently played a major role in protecting and promoting the democratic system in 
Somalia.   
Social media is effective against the dictatorship 
 
 
There have been and still are dictatorial regimes in Africa, Arab countries and some countries of the 
world, most of them have been destroyed over social media, for example, if you consider the uprising 
called the Arab Spring, social media plays a powerful role. Likewise, several dictatorship systems 
operating in African countries have been changed and social media has also helped. Therefore, the 
participants of this study were asked whether social media could play a role in defending Somalia 
against  a  dictatorial  regime88%  of  respondents  strongly  supported  the  role  of  social  media  in 
protecting Somalia from dictatorship. 
Social media is effective in helping Somali citizens follow the country's political situation and increase 
their patriotism. 
 
 
Somalia is a country that has been in a difficult situation for the past 31 years, there were very few 
people  who  can  always  follow  the  political  situation  of  the  country  by  listening  the  radio  news.  
Technological developments in social media in the last 18 years have made it possible for the Somali 
society  in  different  parts  of  the  country  to  follow  the  latest  situation  in  the  country,  the  ongoing 
changes and the effects of good or bad coming from abroad and affecting their country. 90% of the 
respondents, which is equivalent to 381 people out of 424 people who participated in this survey 
indicated that the social media played an important role in the flowing the situation of the country and 
increasing the level of citizenship of the Somali individual. 
 
Social Media helps politically disenfranchised groups make their voices heard and seek justice. 
 
  54 

Daha International University Academic Journal  Vol. 2, No. 1, 2023  diuaj.com 
(DIUAJ) 
 
 
Somalia, which is a country with power sharing system based on the 4.5 system, there is always a 
complaint from some people who are looking for political, social or economic rights that are missing. 
Before technology advanced, it was difficult for them to voice their grievances and they had  few 
channels to voice their grievances. In this period when social media is widely used in the Somali 
society, the participants in this study were asked whether social media  plays an important role in 
obtaining  the  rights  of  the  oppressed95%  of  the  respondents  said  that  social  media  helps  the 
oppressed by conveying their complaints. 
 
 
 
Which social media type would you recommend for a Somali politician who wants political 
success? 
Total  424(100%) 
Facebook   267(63%) 
Twitter   114(27%) 
Instagram   16(4%) 
Whatsapp   21(5%) 
Telegram  6(1%) 
 
Recently, Somali politicians have turned their election campaigns to social media such as Facebook 
and Twitter. 
When we asked the participants of this research, what type of social media they would recommend 
that the Somali politician should increase its use in order to be in line with the public opinion. The 
most  common  recommendation  was  to  increase  the  use  of  Facebook  (63%),  followed  by  Twitter 
which was recommended by 27% of respondents. So when we consider the use of social media, the 
most used by Somali politicians at this time is Facebook because the most of the society use it, while 
Twitter users are mostly politicians.  
 
 
 
  55 

|          | Total     |    |          | 424(100%)   |    |
|:---------|:----------|:---|:---------|:------------|:---|
|          | Facebook  |    |          | 267(63%)    |    |
| Twitter  |           |    | 114(27%) |             |    |
|          | Instagram |    |          | 16(4%)      |    |
| Whatsapp |           |    | 21(5%)   |             |    |
|          | Telegram  |    |          | 6(1%)       |    |

Daha International University Academic Journal  Vol. 2, No. 1, 2023  diuaj.com 
(DIUAJ) 
 
 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
          Today,  developments  in  technology  and  the  use  of  smart  phones  and  to  space  connected 
without having mobile device and computers through enables them to access the information they 
want. On the other hand, in today's world, politics is carried out through social media. Politicians and 
political party’s political propaganda to do and public opinion to create for   social nets uses. Also 
social  media  political  actors  by  in  is  used.  2008  in  the  year  first  times  USA  presidential  in  the 
elections  applicant  the  one  which...  barrack  Obama's  social  media  effective  and  active  away  and 
ultimately won the election shows how much power social media has in terms of politics.  
Again, it can be said that social media is very important in setting the agenda, distorting information 
and informing the society. It is seen that public opinion and politics are reconstructed by changing 
with the effect of social media. The advantage of social media in guiding the public and politics is 
that it provides a quick interaction. All the information in the social media is learned by the society in 
a short time and as a result, it becomes a very important communication tool in directing the society.  
In the study, the data obtained by the questionnaire method created in google form from a sample of 
424 people were analyzed with the SPSS program and the results were interpreted. Participants in this 
study have strongly demonstrated that social media has a strong influence on politics and democracy, 
and has also increased the awareness and following of the Somali people about the situation in the 
country therefore Social media prevents dictatorship and supports the implementation of democracy. 
In  the  same  way,  according  to  the  results,  in  the  last  political  elections,  the  political  success  of 
Somalis and their reputation in the society was influenced or determined by social media.   
RESOURCES 
de Zúñiga, H. G., Huber, B., & Strauß, N. (2018). Social media and democracy. Profesional de la Información, 27(6), 
1172-1180. 
Goyanes, M., Borah, P., & de Zúñiga, H. G. (2021). Social media filtering and democracy: Effects of social media news 
use and uncivil political discussions on social media unfriending. Computers in Human Behavior, 120, 106759. 
Iosifidis, P., & Nicoli, N. (2020). Digital democracy, social media and disinformation. Routledge. 
Kent, M. L. (2013). Using social media dialogically: Public relations role in reviving democracy. Public relations review, 
39(4), 337-345. 
 Loader, B. D., & Mercea, D. (2012). Social media and democracy. 
Loader, Brian D., and Dan Mercea. "Networking democracy? Social media innovations and participatory politics." 
Information, communication & society 14, no. 6 (2011): 757-769. 
Margetts, H. (2018). Rethinking democracy with social media. Political Quarterly, 90(S1). 
Mutsvairo, B., & Rønning, H. (2020). The Janus face of social media and democracy? Reflections on Africa. Media, 
  56 

| In the study, the data obtained by the questionnaire method created in google form from a sample of   |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 424 people were analyzed with the SPSS program and the results were interpreted. Participants in this |
| study have strongly demonstrated that social media has a strong influence on politics and democracy,  |
| and has also increased the awareness and following of the Somali people about the situation in the    |
| country therefore Social media prevents dictatorship and supports the implementation of democracy.    |
| In the same way, according to the results, in the last political elections, the political success of  |
| Somalis and their reputation in the society was influenced or determined by social media.             |

Daha International University Academic Journal  Vol. 2, No. 1, 2023  diuaj.com 
(DIUAJ) 
 
Culture & Society, 42(3), 317-328. 
Persily, N., & Tucker, J. A. (Eds.). (2020). Social media and democracy: The state of the field, prospects for reform. 
Price, E. (2013). Social media and democracy. Australian Journal of Political Science, 48(4), 519-527. 
Sunstein, C. R. (2018). # Republic: Divided democracy in the age of social media. Princeton University Press. 
Tucker, J. A., Theocharis, Y., Roberts, M. E., & Barberá, P. (2017). From liberation to turmoil: Social media and 
democracy. Journal of democracy, 28(4), 46-59. 
Xenos, M. A., Vromen, A., & Loader, B. D. (2014). The great equalizer? Patterns of social media use and youth political 
engagement in three advanced democracies. In The networked young citizen (pp. 33-54). Routledge. 
Zhuravskaya, E., Petrova, M., & Enikolopov, R. (2020). Political effects of the internet and social media. Annual Review 
of Economics, 12, 415-438. 
 
  57 