An operator’s point of view
Azeddine Gati, Fatma Ezzahra Salem, Ana Maria Galindo Serrano,
Didier Marquet, Stephane Le Masson, Thomas Rivera,
Dinh-Thuy Phan-Huy, Zwi Altman, Jean-Baptiste Landre,
Olivier Simon, Esther Le Rouzic, Fabrice Bourgart,
Stephane Gosselin, Marc Vautier, Eric Gourdin, Taoufik En-Najjary,
Mamdouh El-Tabach, Raluca-Maria Indre, Guillaume Gerard, Gwenaelle Delsart
Orange Labs, Chaˆtillon, France
Email: {fatma.salem,anamaria.galindoserrano,azeddine.gati}@orange.com
9102 raM 22  ]IN.sc[  1v72690.3091:viXra
Abstract—The exponential growth in networks’ traffic (BAU) trends. We can observe that the energy use pattern
accompanied by the multiplication of new services like for the different network components increases due to the
those promised by the 5G led to a huge increase in the
expected traffic growth. This power increase is due to the
infrastructures’ energy consumption. All over the world, many
fact that the rate of efficiency improvement is slower than
telecom operators are facing the problem of energy consumption
the traffic growth rate. Particularly, for the fixed access the
and Green networking since many years and they all convey
today that it turned from sustainable development initiative power remains almost constant since authors assume the use of
to an OPEX issue. Therefore, the challenge to make the ICT Optical Line Termination (OLT), whose energy consumption
sector more energy-efficient and environment-friendly has
remains somehow constant independently of the load.
become a fundamental objective not only to green networks
but also in the domain of green services that enable the ICT
sectors to help other industrial sector to clean their own energy
consumption. The present paper is a point of view of a European
telecom operator regarding green networking. We address some
technological advancements that would enable to accelerate this
ICT green evolution after more than 15 years of field experience
and international collaborative research projects. Basically, the
paper is a global survey of the evolution of the ICT industry
in green networks including optical and wireless networks and
from hardware improvement to the software era as well as the
green orchestration.
Index Terms—Energy Consumption, 5G, ICT, green networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
There is no doubt on the role played by the Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) sector in economy, making Fig. 1. Energy consumption functionalities shares of ICT systems.
cities more efficient and bringing communication everywhere.
Nevertheless, the sector itself is responsible for between 2% It is true that the energy consumption issue has always been
and 2.5% of the total global carbon emissions [1] and has part of the environmental footprint and social responsibility.
important tendencies to continue growing. Nowadays, the concern on energy consumption diversifies and
The four main information processing functions in mod- other disciplines such as systems engineering, applied research
ern ICT-electronic systems are: computation, communication, or marketing, are strongly working on this subject, especially
storage, and display, as shown in Figure 1 [2]. Particularly, with the emergence of the energy market and the smart grids.
today energy costs for large service providers are substantial, The green subject is transverse and encouraged by the
and in the case of communication networks, can be a large industry, the public authorities and by regulators. For instance,
component of Operational Expenditures (OPEX). multiple projects were launched during the last years such
Recent studies of network energy use have shown that as GreenTouch [4], FP7-Earth [5], SoGreen [6], Opera-Net
the power consumption today is dominated by the access [7], among which many have been funded by the European
equipment, i.e., edge points, although the transport network community.
equipment will remain stable even with increasing traffic. Sustainable development is a very broad area. For a long
Reference [3] shows the evolution until 2020 of the total time it has been confined to the life sciences, a new branch
power-per-user across all services for the Business as Usual which is taught from the primary education. Due to the

magnitude of the climate, the ozone layer and waste man- consumption of each network element, e.g., a server consumes
agement issues, the sustainable development topic has drifted, much more than an access point or a Base Station (BS), but
under the pressure of certain lobbies, to purely regulatory or rather the number of elements in each sector and the number
societal aspects such as negative growth [8]. The subject is still of clients connected to each network element.
perceived as an additional tax or expense. In the ICT sector, the The challenge of reducing environmental footprint is shared
sustainable development topic was quickly transformed into an by all the major operators in the world. Their stated objectives
opportunity for growth and cost reduction as soon as it was vary according to their networks and ecosystems characteris-
identified by other sectors as a major axis enabling to reduce tics. The environmental footprint reduction targets vary from
their environmental impact. operator to operator and the used references are not the same.
The digital information transport requires networks that Certain operators have not even defined any reference date for
basically consist of transmitters and receivers exchanging their green transformation plan.
information via media such as copper, fiber optics or the air Note that the measurement index is also variable, e.g.,
(wireless). At the end of the chain, we find either client devices some operators talk about greenhouse gas emission while
in the one hand, servers or Data Centers (DCs) on the other others use energy consumption. However, all operators are
hand. To convey information from one point to another, each now considering energy reduction as a major objective in their
network element consumes locally electrical energy. Ideally, strategy because it is a constant growing expense. Future 5G
the equipment energy consumed should be equal to the energy design for example, has arised low energy consumption in the
transmitted. However, this is not the case, mainly because top 5 requirements list.
of the heat losses in electronic circuits, the execution of We present in this paper some technological levers that
local treatments (modulation, conversion, Field-Programmable would enable to enhance the Energy Efficiency (EE) in future
Gate Array (FPGA), etc) or even due to the communication ICT systems. For instance, simplification of the network’s ar-
protocols. chitecture, green orchestration, improvement of materials and
The “green” challenge is directly related to the exponential electronics, optical scalability, etc. Many networks’ segments
growth of the network traffic. Orange group expects an annual are impacted by these advancements: access network, core
increase in traffic of about 40% to 100% per year, while network, switching/routing and data centers.
we observe a decrease in the Average Revenue Per User
The remainder of this paper is as follows: Section II
(ARPU) due to the highly competitive market on the one hand,
gives an insight into the fundamental laws for communication
especially in developed countries, and on the other hand, due
systems especially Shannon limit and Moore’s law. Section
to operators increasing OPEX investment such as the energy
III introduces the future trends in semiconductors, both in
growing cost. Figure 2 gives a summary of the constraints for
materials and components. Section IV introduces the recent
a telecom group like Orange.
green advancements in optical networks. Section V presents
various solutions enabling to enhance the energy efficieny
in wireless networks. Section VI presents the challenges
behind the real time orchestration of the network under energy
consumption constraints. Section VII shows how to adapt
the network’s architecture towards a greener one. Section
VIII presents the recent green studies on software eco-design,
cooling and energy storage. Section IX presents some math-
ematical approaches used for green for instance game theory
for assessing services energy consumption and Reinforcement
Learning for ASM orchestration in 5G networks. Finally
Section X concludes the paper and gives some perspectives.
II. FUNDAMENTAL LAWS FOR COMMUNICATIONS
This section is an overview of the fundamentals and laws
that drive telecommunication system capacity and energy
Fig. 2. Orange group green challenges
consumption prediction.
Even though the evolution of electronics allows a favorable
A. Shannon’s law
trend in energy consumption, it could be completely absorbed
by the introduction of new services such as High-Definition This law defines the limit of the capacity of a propagation
Television (HDTV), gaming, and 3D applications which re- channel between a simple telecommunication transmitter and
quire huge bandwidth and energy resources. a receiver. It sets out the maximum flow that can be achieved
From a global network point of view, the energy consump- in a link and it is expressed as the link capacity:
tion is about 10 W/user in access, 1 W/user in transport and 0,1
P
W/user in the core. These figures do not reflect the individual C ≤ W ∗ log(1 + ) (1)
N

where W is the signal bandwidth, P is the received power whose interoperability has to be optimized in order to reduce
at the receiver and N is the noise including interference. The the consumed energy.
received power represents the amount of power induced by the Operators are also densifying/updating their networks to
transmitter and collected by the receptor after propagation. increase their perceived Quality of Service (QoS) to such an
This law (or rather limit) underlines a fundamental princi- extent that today we speak of capillary networks or networks
ple: to increase the capacity of a network, one must increase with multiple antennas serving an active user i.e., more anten-
either the frequency band or the received power at the receiver. nas than active users in a given moment. This would definitely
Increasing the frequency band is not a straightforward solution make green networks a very challenging objective.
since bandwidth is very expensive, and also complicated from Furthermore, note that the mobile handsets easy handling,
a hardware point view. That is why legacy networks high ergonomic and autonomy induce that today 80% of mobile
data rates have been essentially driven by an increase of the use occurs in fix situations, i.e., indoor, home, office. Also,
transmitted power. the transport of voice for the same quality requires 64 Kbit/s
From an EE point of view, the telecommunications equip- in the legacy Plesiochronous Digital Hierarchy (PDH) network
ment enhancement is continuous, around +2% per year. Nev- and 320 Kbit/s when it is carried by the IP.
ertheless, we observe that the increase in capacity comes We could think that the Shannon’s law is a fatality since to
together with a significant increase in the bandwidth used for improve the throughput or the QoS it is mandatory to increase
these technologies. Indeed, in the case of the radio, we passed the power and therefore the consumed energy. However, other
from 2G with a signal bandwidth of 200 kHz per carrier to degrees of freedom exist, e.g., the use of smaller and lower
4G with up to 20 MHz band. power transmitters, the use of Multiple-Input Multiple-Output
We can see in Figure 3 that over the last 20 years the BSs (MIMO) which allows going beyond Shannon’s law by
have multiplied their transmission capacity per unit of energy multiplying the coherent transmitters, spatial-time energy
by 1000. The hidden problem behind this favorable devel- focalization, etc. All these techniques can improve the
opment is that the rates boost has been essentially allowed received power without increasing the transmitted one. In this
by an increase in the transmitted power which induces more document we aim to give some ideas in this direction.
energy consumption. In any case, in the past the efforts have
been mainly put in improving the systems Spectral Efficiency
(SE) while now it is necessary to focus on the systems EE. B. Moore’s Law then Koomey’s: A hardware advance coun-
Notice that the target of multiplying the EE by 1000 has been teracted by software
demonstrated during the GreenTouch project.
Moore’s Law is about the computing power of microproces-
sors. The first Moore’s Law that was heuristically established
was published in 1965. It stated that the semiconductors
complexity doubles every two years at a constant cost. The
revision of this law in 1975 showed that the density of
transistors on microprocessors on a silicon chip doubles every
two years.
This implies that the capacity of the different processors
in our servers, DCs or signal processing devices doubles
every two years with a chip of the same size. This has
greatly miniaturized the Printed Circuit Boards (PCB) for
telecommunication equipments such as PCs, phones or tablets.
Dr. J. Koomay resumed this work in order to analyze
the energy performance of microprocessors. He published a
thesis where he showed that the number of calculations per
energy unit consumed is doubling every two years since 1946.
We can then think that to reduce energy consumption of
telecommunication systems, we just need to renew equipments
Fig. 3. BS transmission capacities per unit of energy
at intervals calculated according to the Return on Investment
(ROI). In fact, this evolution is largely absorbed by:
Telecommunication operators, especially in mobile net-
works, tend towards solutions that would ideally reach the The exponential traffic increase and thus the number of
•
fixed networks’ performances, i.e., 1 Gbps everywhere and operations to be performed per time unit.
all the time. Both fix and mobile networks are converging but The physical limits of miniaturization.
•
the technological diversity i.e., Digital Subscriber Line (DSL), The software complexity increase becoming more and
•
fiber, 2G, 3G, 4G, WiFi, tends to make it very complex. A final more resources greedy. See for example the evolution of
user could be served by multiple networks, and will choose the the Windows system through the last 10 years compared
best one. This implies the existence of overlapping networks to PC capabilities.

The main result was that the EE, i.e., number of compu- slowdown period for Complementary Metal-Oxide Semicon-
tations per kWh, of electronics is continuing to grow at the ductor (CMOS) technology processors. The micro-electronics
same speed as Moore’s law, however, the crucial question is: presents a deviation from Moore’s Law in recent years, in-
is there a limit? We have probably to seek a response in the duced by the extreme miniaturization which faces the problem
next years from nanotechnology progress. of thermal effect.
It is possible to use low-power design techniques at different
III. FUTURE TRENDS IN SEMICONDUCTORS FOR ICTS stages of a system design. The top-down design goes from the
most abstract level to the lowest level. For systems, there are
In our networks, electronic components constitute an im-
four levels:
portant part in the overall energy consumption. Electronics
Functional level
strongly impacts the performance and the energy consumption •
Architectural level
of servers, routers, access points and even the end of the •
Logic level
optical connections. Also, the energy consumption introduced •
Electrical and physical level
by electronics in mobile and Internet of Things (IoT) networks •
has to be taken into account. Clearly, it is more interesting to implement low power
conceptions early in the design process than at the end. At
A. Trends in materials for ICT all levels, the method consists on estimating the consumption
of the different solutions that are available to choose the
Electronic components can be split into two kinds according
best. Current research focuses on the estimation algorithms. It
to their functionalities. These two classes are defined by the
should be considered that the optimal solution for consumption
semiconductor used.
may be disadvantageous from the viewpoint of the processing
- Silicon components: Silicon is the most widely used
speed and circuit size and therefore its price. In the future,
semiconductor. The majority of common components are made
nanotechnologies and new materials will be more and more
with silicon e.g., transistors, capacitors, some photodiodes, etc.
present in semiconductors devices and physical limits will be
- III-V components: These semiconductors are made with
reached.
III-V semiconductors as Gallium Arsenide (GaAs) or indium
The solution comes therefore from a reorientation of re-
phosphide (InP). They are used for lasers, diodes, Infra-Red
search on other levers than miniaturization, such as massively
photo detectors or some high speed electronic components
parallel architecture. The issue that arises is to delegate some
such as RF transistors.
calculations to full optical components that are particularly
This separation between silicon and III-V components is
suited, rather than the massively parallel architecture. Thus,
present in semiconductor industries. Silicon industries are
the optical technology will move from purely transmission
represented by very huge firms such as Intel, AMD, STMicro-
functionalities to data processing or computing features. This
electronics, and Motorola. III-V semiconductors industries are
is a highly complex area since the optical components are both
represented by more specialized firms such as Alcatel Lucent
expensive and difficult to adapt to PCBs.
for Telecoms, Osram and Phillips for lighting applications,
Freescale for high power transistors and Hamamatsu for op- B. Future trends on components
toelectronics. In the future this segmentation will be different The two components that are more strongly impacted by
with the Gallium Nitride (GaN) semiconductor use rise. The the evolutions of semiconductors are processors and the high
boundary between electronic devices and optic devices will power amplifier for BSs. IoT needs cheap processors with
probably be less clear than nowadays. good performance and low power consumption. These charac-
For 10 years now a new III-V semiconductor is emerging teristics have been implemented in smartphones and now are
for optoelectronics applications as white leds, laser, blue-ray used in small devices like tiny computers Raspberry or Arietta.
player and high power applications such BSs power amplifiers. The performance has been increased by a factor of three,
These families of semiconductors are GaN and compound of the power consumed has been divided by three and the cost
Indium Gallium Nitride (InGaN). reduced in a factor of five. These trends are determinant for the
Looking at the evolution of the integration of transistors future evolution of silicon industries since they give a positive
over the past 75 years, we notice that they have evolved from balance between smartphones mobility and performances.
1D transistor towards integrated circuits (2D) and nowadays However, silicon has limited physical properties. Semicon-
to 3D integrated circuits. This ‘S’ evolution has experienced ductors such as GaN allow overtaking these limits. GaN
remarkable and important technological advances that have components will work at higher voltage i.e., more than 1kV,
allowed reducing the consumption and has facilitated the several A/mm and at high frequency level i.e., more than 30
integration/manufacturing. GHZ.
However, this development tends to slow down as the GaN can be produced at a lower cost than silicon and it en-
miniaturization efforts in nanotechnology face significant chal- hances the transistor performance. With GaN transistors, there
lenges. This should induce, unless there is a paradigm shift, is an ability to switch higher voltages and higher currents faster
an increase in the consumption proportional to the process- than any other transistor. With these advanced characteristics,
ing speed. Some studies already show that we are in the new applications can be introduced.

Industries control already the growth of GaN on 150 mm 2) Photonic integration: This is a very promising point
silicon wafers and start tailoring the growth on 200 mm silicon which integrates the signal processing and the laser on the
wafers. They managed to replace the sapphire, which is much same silicon board (hybrid photonic-electronic chip). This
more expensive than silicon. All these headways show that the innovation will considerably reduce the consumption of the
GaN components should quickly replace silicon, particularly E/O conversion and thus an improved end-to-end connection.
for RF transistors used for power amplifiers in BSs. This lever is currently being integrated in equipment by
ALU and Huawei. Nevertheless, it is in its very first stage and
IV. OPTICAL NETWORKS we believe that further integration will enable more energy
savings in the coming years.
The network transformation to all-optical is obviously a
Summarizing, this technology is currently being applied
sustainable and effective way of reducing the energy con-
punctually for certain long distance optical transmission equip-
sumption. It primarily affects the transport and routing in the
ment in the core network. In the coming 3 to 5 years it is
network sector. Its advantages are:
expected a generalized application at least in all the O/E con-
No losses in transmission.
•
version parts of all equipment with optical interfaces. For the
Immunity against electromagnetic interference.
•
5-10 years to come, we could expect to have this technology
A significant bandwidth.
•
in the DCs for the servers interconnection with a massive
Today, it is estimated that an optical fiber can carry up to
integration in order to decrease the cost and complexity [10],
160 wavelengths with the Wavelength Division Multiplexing
[11].
(WDM) technique. Each wavelength can support 10, 40 or
Finally, operators will not participate in the development of
100 Gbit/s and soon should achieve the Tbit/s. Notice that
this technology. Nevertheless, increasing our requirements in
due to Shannon’s limit, the maximum capacity will be around
terms of cost and consumption will push vendors to boost this
50 Tbit/s and therefore the number of wavelengths will be less
solution or maybe others.
than the 80 transmitted today. Currently, these high capacity
3) Dynamic routing: The network is a mesh where multiple
optical fibers are primarily used to provide point-to-point
paths between two nodes are possible. In the one hand, the
interconnections between electronic routers. In the following
transport can be made via a single path which may seem more
sections, we address the envisaged solutions in each network
economical. The problem is that this path must be oversized
sector to make full-optical networks more energy efficient.
and cannot be disabled. On the other hand, the use of diversity
of routing paths allows transmitting the information through
A. Core and transport
different routes and to turn off or pause the paths without traf-
The data rates evolution from 10 Gbit/s nodes to 100 fic based on the load. Adaptive rerouting of traffic associated
Gbit/s nodes has increased the capacity of the optical fiber with Low Power Mode can also bring savings thanks to the
links. However, it did not imply power saving since the large traffic variation observed during night and day periods.
new transponders consume more. For example, a 10 Gbit/s This is particularly profitable if multiple paths between nodes
transponder consumes around 30 W, and a 100 Gbit/s are possible. Indeed this provides the finest granularity to
transponder consumes around 160 W i.e., an increase of 10 switch off capacity according to effective load, and this may
times the data rate and 5 times the energy consumption. The also reduce the impact on latency variation. Despite the fact
envisaged solutions are the following: that some technology enablers exist, the overall impact on the
QoS or network reliability is still unknown and studies are
1) Bypassing nodes: In optical networks, the important needed to prove the applicability of adaptive rerouting.
points are the capacity and the reach. Indeed, the reach allows 4) Towards full-optical switches: The Opti-
saving in the number of Optical/Electrical (O/E) conversions. cal/Electrical/Optical (O/E/O) conversion can be reduced
Having long reach elements allow to bypass nodes and there- and eventually eliminated through the optical switching that
fore to reduce the O/E conversions. This bypass is often called would allow data to be switched directly in the optical
“transparent offloaded”. Transparency in the core networks domain. The easiest way to provide connectivity in an
avoids the need of signal regeneration, the use of routers, optical network is by assigning a specific wavelength to each
and all the “useless” conversions. This technique showed that source-destination, this technique is called Optical Circuit
50% of energy reduction at the core and metro network can Switching (OCS). By bypassing the intermediate nodes in
be achieved. It has been introduced in Orange networks since the optical domain, the OCS is able to eliminate the need for
2008. The motivation to do so was economic rather than saving O/E/O conversion in the core of the network. However, in the
on network energy consumption [9]. OCS, the whole capacity of a wavelength is dedicated to a
The idea is not to remove the electronics of the transport specific source-destination pair and cannot be shared by other
layer because there will always remain converters, but to nodes. This coarse granularity in the switching can lead to
make the most of optics. The objective is to reduce the severe bandwidth under-utilization, since one wavelength can
electrical conversion needed for the transit or to better share carry up to 100 Gbit/s. Today, electrical solutions are used to
resources to reduce their number. exploit correctly the coarse granularity. Tomorrow, photonic
switching solutions could also address this issue providing

both capacity and fine granularity thanks to optical packet or erating complexity and the required consumption of the
burst switching. Studies [12] have estimated that savings could small central offices.
be very interesting i.e., more than 20% in metro networks
In the access, additional energy saving opportunities will
depending on scenarios and traffic. Such technologies are
result from the implementation and activation of standby
thus actively explored notably in Orange Labs, and there have
modes and/or by the capacity dynamic adaptation as a function
been few industrial prototypes from ALU, INTUNE, Huawei,
of the instantaneous capacity required by the service. For
among others. Industry and operators seem however chilly to
point-to-point communications, it is imperative to develop
evolve towards these solutions, making technology progress
an optical transposition of the IEEE 802.3az [13] standard
slower than we would like. From our point of view, this lever
dedicated to the Gigabit Ethernet copper interface.
is feasible, however, it still lacks of maturity.
In current optical networks deployments (“LA Fiber” Or-
ange project) sleep modes exist for all G-PON equipment as
5) Removing redundancy: In optical networks and particu- well as for the future XG-PON1 or NG-PON2. However, the
larly in the core, redundancy is a simple and effective way to dynamic adaptation of the service transmission rate is being
ensure the continuity of the service. This implies that every introduced using multiple modulations, which will potentially
element of the network is duplicated (1+1) and permanently introduce dynamicity to the hardware consumption as a func-
active, with the implicit extra energy consumption. Further- tion of the data rate.
more, it requires bandwidth reserves that would be used only Finally, when considering the transition to full-optical net-
punctually. works it is needed to consider the emergence of multiple low
Some ideas are beginning to emerge under the name of rate applications such as Low-Power Wide-Areas networks
Quality of Protection (QoP). The principle of this technique is (LPWA), which were not envisaged in the initial deployments
to define a QoP indicator as a function of the service and to dedicated to triple play residential IP. These terminals will not
reduce the QoS for lower priority services. The QoP is based introduce big amount of data but will prevent the network from
on an optimization strategy of the transmission paths according entering a sleep mode due to their recurrent transmission.
to the required flow rate and the energy consumption.
V. RADIO NETWORKS
The expected energy savings could be quite interesting i.e.,
In recent years the radio industry has experienced a real
several tens per cent depending on the scenario. However, this
change from the green point of view. This change has not
would require a deep change in mentality of operational teams
been the answer to the environmental problems our planet is
since it means trading network availability against energy. Any
facing but to two practical reasons: on the one hand the growth
disruption in the core transport network, where protection is
on the requirements of autonomy of user devices and on the
implemented, can impact hundreds of thousands of customers.
other hand the technological radio expansion to developing
Giving up on protection for low QoP traffic means that for
countries with no or limited electrical infrastructure.
these clients there could be large interruption of service in
In wireless communications the information is transmitted
case of a failure.
through electromagnetic waves traveling over the air. These
It is worth mentioning that this lever is very sensitive
waves are subject to the path loss which is the loss in
for an operator as it directly impacts the security and the
signal strength when traveling from the source to the receiver.
service reliability. This would need a complete paradigm
Conservation of energy tells us that signal will reduce as a
shift on network security applying other technics than just
function of the distance to the receiver.
redundancy. From our point of view, this lever is far from
It is very interesting to realize that for 1 W transmitted
being implemented.
by a wireless Access Point (AP), the power perceived by the
User Equipment (UE) is not more that 10−6 W, which means
6) Access: Orange has experienced full-optical networks
that 99,9999% of the signal is lost elsewhere. It is astonishing
as a first step towards switching to an all-optical access. This
to find that the energy waste is fundamentally inherent to
will make obsolete superposed networks dedicated to a single
the wireless cellular system. The energy loss is therefore in
service i.e., Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN),
the DNA of wireless systems, fact that should be hopefully
DSL, residential. The performance in terms of capacity and
addressed for 5G.
range will conditionally allow:
A. A 5G designed to be green
The unification in all-optical from central office will allow
•
decommissioning the copper lines. The next generation mobile communications, or 5G, em-
The use of optical interfaces for residential, businesses, braces ambitious objectives. It is expected to provide 1000
•
wireless BSs connection and isolated equipment. times more capacity than 4G, to support 9 billion users and
The introduction of optical equipment higher in the a more diverse range of applications, services and device
•
network infrastructure, which distances typically are up types. To achieve these targets, 5G should reduce latency,
to 20 km. improve the communications reliability, have longer battery
The use of amplification or regeneration techniques, life for devices and higher user bit rates. All this with a
•
known as reach extender, will also allow reducing op- drastic enhanced EE which will enable 5G systems to consume

a fraction of the energy that 4G mobile networks consumes
today for the same transmitted amount of data. From white
papers published by consortiums, manufacturers and operators
we see that EE has been put forward as one of the main targets
for 5G. Nevertheless, few details on how this objective could
be reached are given.
Figures on green have been given by Asian and European
companies. On the one hand, some Asian companies bet for
a 5G network that will keep the EE stable with regards to 4G
(Datang). On the other hand, some European companies en-
visage a greener mobile network where the consumed energy
is divided by 10. This number has been given by EU METIS
project and adopted by 5G PPP association.
Orange appears as the only operator that advocates for the
introduction of the ambitious green target of reducing the
network consumed energy by a factor of 10 [14].
Fig. 4. Power consumption breakdown in different types of BSs
For the green network aspects, two Key Performance Indi-
cators (KPIs) are indistinctly used: EE (bits/Joule) and energy
consumption (Watt). In order to conceive an optimal network
which does not scale with the load and 2) transmission
in terms of energy consumption, the green requirements have
processes: such as transceiver chains, coding and decoding and
to be considered from the beginning, unlike previous mobile
channel estimation and precoding with an energy consumption
system generations for which energy consumption concerns
that linearly vary with the traffic.
were addressed on the fly.
The power model for next generation networks should
Despite the fact that EE is put forward as one of the core
evolve in such a way that with the integration of new tech-
characteristics of 5G by all players, especially by Orange
niques and more power proportional components (i.e., GaN
Group, the green commitments of some consortiums remain
technology for PAs, envelope tracking, etc.) and systems, we
hazy. Firstly, there is not an agreement on the energy KPI
should arrive to almost zero consumption at zero load. Then,
to be used and how to measure it. Secondly, figures given
with the integration of more energy efficient components and
by different players are divergent. Last but not least, the
processes, the energy consumption at maximum load should
embedded energy and the environmental impact of the required
be decreased.
material for the implementation of 5G, foreseen at the 2020
Nowadays research focus on decreasing the power con-
horizon, should be considered. In order for 5G to become
sumption at minimal load, P , which is the straightforward
0
the revolutionary technology that new social tendencies will
way to make mobile networks greener. Notably, advances in
impose it is clear that it has to be natively green.
hardware during the last years have allowed shifting P from
0
80% of the total BS consumption to less than 50%, for the
B. Base stations power model evolution
newest technology. Thanks to that, current power models have
It is well known that the mobile access equipment consumes
50% fix consumption and 50% that scales with the load.
80% of the total mobile network energy [15]. From this 80%,
The existing sleep modes are very basic since their only
nowadays 90% is consumed by the BS and the remaining 10%
target is to not degrade the QoS and to remain transparent to
by the backhaul. In France there exist more than 20.000 sites,
the communication protocols. This results from the fact that
most of them equipped with multiple technologies. Reducing
green concepts became important after the air interface design.
or optimizing the BSs energy consumption is therefore essen-
Nevertheless, recent research [16], [17] show that important
tial to achieve real energy savings.
gains in energy savings could be achieved with the design of
Figure 4 presents the breakdown of the energy consumed
more sophisticated and comprehensive sleep modes, e.g., deep
by the different parts of each type of BS. This is a guide
sleep mode, which would require a change on the air interface
for researchers to show them were efforts are needed. For
i.e., duty cycle, frame structure, etc. this will be possible with
instance, in macro BSs the effort should focus on the Power
the new air interface design in 5G.
Amplifier (PA) optimization, while for small cells, the Base-
band Unit (BBU) and PAs are equally significant. Anyhow,
C. Advanced sleep modes
many research groups are working on this topic and interesting
advances are being achieved, notably, sleep mode techniques Nowadays, only fast sleep mode is proposed and used by
are very promising. operators. It was quickly adopted by operators due to its short
Research studies have shown that the BS power consump- transition time, i.e., symbol rate, which therefore does not
tion is composed of two parts: 1) architectural costs (P ): fixed affect the users QoS. This type of sleep mode brings an energy
0
processes such as control signaling, backhaul infrastructure, consumption decrease of about 10% at the telecom part of the
and the load-independent consumption of baseband processors BS which represents around 3% at the site level.

Nevertheless, as presented in the previous section, new introduction of this green technique.
telecommunication systems should have almost zero consump-
tion at zero loads. This can be achieved with ASMs, which Example of implementation strategy
consist on putting systems in different sleep modes levels A simple way to use the ASMs is a gradual deactivation of
depending on the idle periods. However, ASMs will imply the BS, i.e., whenever the BS is idle (not serving any user),
the introduction of a new frame filling including signaling, we can put it into the different levels of sleep modes gradually
which can be challenging. going from the shortest one to the deepest as shows Figure 5.
The BS power model developed by GreenTouch comprises
multifold hardware components. This model introduces the
Power consumption 
Serving a buffered user 
ASM feature where each of the hardware components can be
∆  
Active  𝑫𝟏 Active 
disabled or configured in a power saving mode when not used.  
The model introduces four sleep levels that combine hardware
∆  
𝑺𝟏
sleep modes depending on the idle periods.
∆  
𝑫𝟐
The BS is considered to work in different sleep modes
User request 
SM1 
depending on its load. The operational modes are: ∆  
𝑺𝟐 ∆  
𝑫𝟑
Sleep mode 1 (SM ): The power amplifier and some
• 1 SM2  SM3 
∆ = ∆  
𝑩 𝑨𝟑
processing components are disabled on an OFDM-symbol
Time 
level (micro sleep). This can be used at reference symbol
∆ 𝑫𝒊  Deactivation duration to enter SM 𝑖, 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} 
level. It takes 71 µs to deactivate and to activate again
∆ 𝑺𝒊  TTiimme esp esnpt einn StM i ni,  i S∈M {1,  𝑖2,,  3𝑖,  4∈}  {1, 2, 3, 4} 
(transition time). With this sleep mode it can be reached ∆ 𝑨𝒊   Activation duration from SM 𝑖, 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4} 
around 15% of energy savings. ∆ 𝑩  Buffering delay 
Sleep mode 2 (SM ): For this sleep mode more of the
• 2
processing hardware is deactivated, so a lower power
Fig. 5. Example of implementation strategy of ASMs
level is reached. However, the transition time is estimated
to 1 ms i.e., subframe level. With this sleep mode around If a user requests a service, such as download of a file, while
35% of energy savings can be achieved. the BS is in sleep mode, we put it in a buffer and trigger the
Sleep mode 3 (SM ): This is a yet deeper sleep mode with activation of the BS. The considered user has then to wait until
• 3
more components switched off and the transition time for the BS wakes up and becomes ready to serve him. Therefore,
both directions is 10 ms, i.e., interrupts the transmission we can be confronted to latency increase due to these buffering
for at least one radio frame. durations.
Sleep mode 4 (SM ): This is the standby mode where the The Bs has also to wake up periodically in order to send
• 4
BS is out of operation but retains wake-up functionality. synchronization bursts such as Primary and Secondary Syn-
Additionally the backhaul is active to re-activate the chronization Signals (respectively PSS and SSS), also Physical
BS. The transition time is more than 1 s . 90% of Control CHannel (PBCH). With such frequent synchronization
energy savings can be achieved with this sleep mode. For signals, we cannot use deep sleep modes, so that we have
instance, if a new air interface is designed in such a way less energy reduction. We studied in [18] the impact of an
that it has more than 1 second between two consecutive increased periodicity of signaling both on energy consumption
transmissions, then the SM can be applied. and network performances. Figure 6 shows that up to 90%
4
Table I summarizes the characteristics of the different ASM of energy savings can be achieved in low loads when we
levels: increase the signaling periodicity. This energy reduction is
decreasing with the load since the more the load increases,
TABLE I the less time between consecutive users is available to put the
ADVANCED SLEEP MODES CHARACTERISTICS BS into sleep mode. However, this strategy induces a latency
increase which can achieve 5ms as shown in Figure 7. This
Sleep Deactivation Minimum Activation
is a constraint in some critical scenarios like Ultra-Reliable
level duration sleep duration duration
Low Latency Communications (URLLC) use case in 5G
SM 35.5 µs 71 µs 35.5 µs
1 networks which requires a latency less than 1ms. Therefore,
SM 0.5 ms 1 ms 0.5 ms
2 a smart orchestration of the ASMs is needed according to the
SM 5 ms 10 ms 5 ms
3 requirements of the network operator in the different use cases
SM 0.5 s 1 s 0.5 s and scenarios.
4
D. Amplifiers
Orange is collaborating with manufacturers in order to
boost the introduction of ASMs since they are very promising The PA market is dominated by the freescale society [19].
and align with optimal telecommunication operational mode, Nevertheless, there is an increase in the number of manufac-
the almost zero consumption at zero load. The arrival of turers working in this field such as Huawei, NSN and ALU.
5G technology appears as the perfect framework for the Their objective is to differentiate from other manufacturers by

| ∆        |
| Active   |
|:---------|

| None    |    |
|:--------|:---|
| ∆𝑩= ∆𝑨𝟑 |    |
|         |    |

| ∆𝑺𝟏   | None   | None   | None   | None   |
|:------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|
|       | ∆𝑫𝟐    |        |        |        |
| SM    | 1      |        |        |        |
|       |        |        | ∆𝑺𝟐    |        |
|       |        |        | SM2    |        |

| ∆𝑫𝒊   | Deactivation duration to enter SM 𝑖, 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}                |
| ∆𝑺𝒊   |                                                                      |
| ∆𝑨𝒊   |                                                                      |
| ∆𝑩    |                                                                      |
|:------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------|
|       | TTiimme esp esnpt einn StM i ni, i S∈M {1, 𝑖2,, 3𝑖, 4∈} {1, 2, 3, 4} |
|       | Activation duration from SM 𝑖, 𝑖 ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}                      |
|       | Buffering delay                                                      |

| Sleep   | Deactivation   | Minimum          | Activation   |
| level   | duration       | sleep duration   | duration     |
|:--------|:---------------|:-----------------|:-------------|
| SM      | 35.5 µs        | 71 µs            | 35.5 µs      |
| 1       |                |                  |              |
| SM      | 0.5 ms         | 1 ms             | 0.5 ms       |
| 2       |                |                  |              |
| SM      | 5 ms           | 10 ms            | 5 ms         |
| 3       |                |                  |              |
| SM      | 0.5 s          | 1 s              | 0.5 s        |
| 4       |                |                  |              |

100 Until today, amplifiers are optimized to the maximum
Signaling periodicity
90   100 ms power and at 100% of load. As an initiative of Orange, an
80   80 ms
  40 ms ETSI document has been standardized so that the amplifiers
70   20 ms
]%   10 ms
efficiency is calculated at several load levels in order to reflect
[ n 60   5 ms
o
itc better the actual operation of these electronic components.
50
u
d
e r C 40 Several techniques have been studied to improve the lin-
E
30 earity of the PA, but only two architectures have been a
20
commercial success, the Doherty and the envelope tracking.
10
1) Doherty or enveloppe tracking: Doherty is a clever
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
combination of two known amplifiers, the Class AB and Class
Load [%]
C put in parallel and combined. A Doherty behaves strictly as
Fig.6. EnergyconsumptionreductionusingASMsdependingonthesignaling
a class AB at low power (<10 W). This technology is widely
periodicity
used in the RFPA at the BS.
The envelope tracking allows adjusting the DC voltage to
5
]s
m Signaling periodicity operate the PA at its optimal efficiency. This highly efficient
[ y
  100 ms
c 4
n   80 ms technology is already implemented in the low-power mobile
e ta   40 ms
l o       2 50  m   m ss devices such as the terminals. Its extension to high powers
t d 3     1 0 m s
e
d remains to be reliable. Also, in the framework of the OP-
d
a  y 2
a ERANET II European project, a proof of concept has been
le
d
 e
g 1 demonstrated until 40 MHz bandwidth. Manufacturers are still
a
re
v working on bandwidth extension to more than 100 GHz.
A
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 2) The gear stick: A PA optimized to the maximum power
Load [%]
is like a moving car with a gearbox blocked on the last speed.
Fig. 7. Average delay added to the baseline latency when using the ASM
The consumption/transmission ratio is good only for the high
powers and it degrades very quickly at low power. This is what
is now installed on the mobile networks. Various techniques
conceiving and producing their own chips and to develop their
begin to appear in order to introduce different and multiple
own strategy. Indeed, some manufacturers are moving towards
optimization points. Therefore, the amplifier will have the
more power per band amplifiers (European manufacturers)
capability to transmit different powers with efficiency close
while others favor the multi-band amplifiers (China). We con-
to its maximum at each power level.
sider that per band amplifiers optimization is a better approach
This trend is real, even if the performance of these tech-
since nowadays, there is no technology mature enough to
niques are not entirely satisfactory today due to the intermod-
achieve a good efficiency for multiband power amplifiers.
ulation problem, the speed regime change problem, etc. these
The development of Radio Frequency Power Amplifier
barriers will probably be overcome in the following 5 years.
(RFPA) touches on different areas such as electronics, mate-
3) Parallelization: Based on the MIMO principle that re-
rials and signal processing. The three drivers in the amplifier
places a link between a transmitter and a receiver by several
development are the efficiency, instantaneous band and linear-
orthogonal links and on the fact that a low PA is more effective
ity.
than one at high power, the parallelization can be very useful
The PA represents 70% of the consumption of the telecom-
to significantly increase the effectiveness of the BS.
munications parts of a BS. Note that the PAs are constantly
Today, this idea is considered by almost all the manufactur-
improved but the changes in protocols and technology, i.e.,
ers research departments. It has been shown by Huawei, ALU,
passing from TDMA to CDMA to OFDMA, often challenge
and Ericson that by combining the reduction in size and the
these improvements, especially with the increasing need for
multiplicity can improve the link budget. On the other hand,
bandwidth and modulation.
the Interuniversity Microelectronics Centre (IMEC, ZTE) have
The main role of a PA is to amplify a signal as closely
shown that this can improve the energy balance. The realiza-
as possible to the original one without introducing distortion.
tion of a prototype is already underway in China by ZTE and
There are two major classes of RFPA:
CMCC and it is already in test phase at ZTE.
The ones used for non-linear signals amplification (class
• 4) Focusing antennas: Focusing antennas spatially focus
C) as for GSM.
the radiated power to the user, in an adaptive way and
The ones used for the amplitude modulation signals (class
• independently of its position. In comparison with conventional
AB) such as CDMA and OFDM, which require linearity
antennas covering a cell, these “smarter” antennas reduce the
capabilities.
required energy to satisfy a user with a gain increased in
In the first case, the RFPAs are simple and they have very several dB. Notice that when gain is increased the power can
high efficiencies. The performance in terms of EE of 3G PAs be decreased the same amount of dB.
have increased from 15% to 45% in 15 years. For the 4G, PAs Some focusing techniques make the received signal both
still have an EE of 20%. stronger and “clean” i.e., without echoes. This would allow

|    |    |    |    |    |    | Signa   | ling pe   | riodicity   | None   |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:--------|:----------|:------------|:-------|
|    |    |    |    |    |    |         | 100       | ms          |        |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |         | 80        | ms          |        |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |         | 40        | ms          |        |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |         | 20        | ms          |        |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |         | 10        | ms          |        |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |         | 5 m       | s           |        |

|    |    |    |    |    |    | Sig   | naling p   | eriodicity   | None   |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |       | 10         | 0 ms         |        |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:------|:-----------|:-------------|:-------|
|    |    |    |    |    |    |       | 80         | ms           |        |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |       | 40         | ms           |        |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |       | 20         | ms           |        |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |       | 10         | ms           |        |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |       | 5          | ms           |        |

the use of very simple receivers as those used for 2G but As illustrated in Figure 9, our RF Tag includes a dipole
achieving data rates of 4G [20]. Even better, focusing antennas tailored for TV frequencies around 600 MHz, an MSP430
are usually composed of antenna elements, each one of them microcontroller, an ADG920 RF switch and an ADG3243
integrating their own amplifier. Research studies performed by Voltage Translator. The RF switch sets the dipole either to a
ALU and Huawei, show that we can replace a large amplifier short-circuit state or an open-circuit state. When the dipole is
inefficient in terms of power consumption by highly efficient in one state, it is mainly transparent to TV RF waves, whereas
small low power amplifiers. when it is in the other state, it is mainly backscattering RF
These antennas are used for point-to-point connections, as waves. The switch is controlled by the MSP430. This latter
well as for microwave transmissions. Nevertheless, their use component has a FM0 modulation binary sequence stored in
for moving targets is still far to be deployed due to the its memory (coding for a black-and-white pixels image) and a
following reasons: synchronization sequence. The MSP430 sets the dipole to one
state, to send a 0 and to the other state, to send a 1. As in one
The frequency needed to update the beam increases with
•
state the tag is transparent to TV waves whereas in the other
the target speed. The standards limit this frequency to
state, it is backscattering them, the reader detects a change in
around 1 kHz. At most, a pedestrian speed could be
the received TV signal. The message is sent periodically with
supported. However, recent studies show that with the
a data rate of 10 bits/seconds.
disruptive concept of predictive antenna, it could be
possible to maintain a robust beam for vehicular speeds
i.e., up to 300 Km/hour [21], [22].
It is needed the synchronization of a large number of an-
•
tenna elements and radio channels with a sub-nanosecond
precision. The electronics for signal processing and the
RF cards are rapidly evolving in order to support a
growing number of elements i.e., 64 elements nowadays
and hundreds in three years time, see Figure 8.
Fig. 9. Our prototype RF tag designed by Dr. Nissem Selmene
As illustrated in Figure 10, our TV reader includes the same
dipole antenna as the RF tag and a RSA5100B Tektronix
spectrum analyzer. The RSA5100B measures in real time,
the received power versus time, over a time window of 20
Fig. 8. Massive MIMO boosts space-time docusing
seconds. The power is measured at the frequency of 645 MHz,
• The targeted user shall transmit a training signal on within a receive bandwidth of 500 kHz. We store a 20 seconds
the same frequency carrier as the focusing antennas. time-sequence of measurement and then post-process it offline,
However, mobile network standards in some cases use using a matlab software (SW) code. The SW code simply
different frequency bands for the BS and the terminal. compares the received power with a moving average power
This problem can be easily solved for some focusing threshold to determine the changes in the received power
techniques [23]. level. Then, the synchronization and the FM0 demodulation
is performed, and the original image is retrieved.
E. Energy-free communicating tags thanks to 5G backscatter-
Figure 10 illustrates an actual measurement and the cor-
ing
responding successful demodulation, performed in Orange
In 2013, the University of Washington presented a new com- Gardens, Chatillon. As illustrated in Figure 11, the nearest TV
munication system that enables an RF tag, called “Ambient source was 2 km away from our location and the tag-to-reader
Backscatter” [24], to send data to an RF reader, without battery distance was of around 40 cm (i.e. almost a wavelength).
and without generating any new RF wave. Instead of spending The experiment was performed indoor at the ground floor,
power to generate an RF wave, the RF tag just backscatters near a window. According to works summarized in [25],
the ambient RF waves generated by TV towers. In this sub- one can expect higher tag-to-reader distances (several meters)
section, we will first present our own prototype of backscatter with more advanced detection algorithms than a basic energy
communication system, designed based on [24], and then, we detector.
will elaborate on the potential applications for IoT cellular As a future operator of 5G networks, we believe that this
networks operators. technology could potentially help the massive development of

Fig. 12. Ambient Backscatters in 5G networks
environment (smart cities, smart factories and smart homes)
and detecting nearby RF tags. The main idea is to render
this environment sensitive and reactive to tagged objects or
people. Figure 13-a) ilustrates examples for the private sector:
a door opens when it detects the arrival of a bike, avoiding
the owner to get down the bike, a fast moving autonomous
moving machine avoids the collision with a tagged person
circulating in the factory, a tagged package would be scanned
regularly during its trip. Figure 13-b) illustrates examples for
the public sector: a traffic light warns a handicapped tagged
Fig. 10. Our prototype RF reader
person, a truck is informed whether a bin is full or empty
and stops to collect the bin only when necessary (to save
fuel), a streetlight intensifies its light only in a presence of
a tagged person. All these services could be provided with
existing IoT technologies, such as RFID [26], low power
wide area technologies [27] or cellular IoT [28]. However, all
these technologies would additional RF waves to be generated.
We believe there is an opportunity to try and offer these
services with energy-free communicating tags that would re-
cycle ambient RF waves to send their messages and that would
recycle ambient energy (solar, motion or RF energy, depending
on the use case) to power themselves.
Fig. 11. Distances between reader, source and tag during the experiment
IoT in a green manner. Indeed, as illustrated in Figure 12, if
applied to a 5G, the ambient backscatter concept can benefit
from a large and dense population of sources and readers.
Indeed, numerous 5G network base stations and 5G devices
could play the role of sources. Also in addition to deploying
RF readers, one could upgrade 5G devices and 5G networks
with the reader capability.
Fig. 13. Example of potential use cases of the ambient backscattter, with 5G
Figure 13 illustrates potential use cases of the ambient
network as source, and RF readers deployed on smart cities, factories and
backscatter system. In these examples, the 5G network serves
homes.
as a source of RF waves, and RF readers are deployed on the

F. Advanced receivers Before examining how the second criterion (EE) intervenes
and will continue to intervene, it is worth making a quick
At the BS side basic scientific levers for green are well
assessment of the choices made in terms of modulation for
known and some of them have been introduced in this
radio communication systems. In terms of modulation types,
document. On the receivers side, their impact on network
there are two main groups, i.e., the linear modulation systems
power consumption is not often considered since the power
and the non-linear modulations. Linear modulation systems
consumption constraint is already inherent to their design.
can have a dimension by Amplitude-Shift Keying (ASK) and
Indeed, autonomy is a fundamental factor that is considered
Phase-Shift Keying (PSK) or be two-dimensional Quadrature
in the DNA of the device and therefore the degree of freedom
Amplitude Modulation (QAM). Those with non-linear modu-
to optimize this area is very limited.
lation by frequency shift are Frequency-Shift Keying (FSK)
Also, receptors consumption is mainly driven by the screen
and Minimum-Shift Keying (MSK). The former are more
more than by the radio part, i.e., according to studies con-
spectrally efficient while the latter are more energy efficient.
ducted at Orange Labs receivers [29], energy consumption
It has to be considered that in addition to SE and EE, other
corresponds to 50% screen, 20% signal processing and 30%
selection criteria are involved, i.e., the out-of-band radiation,
radio. This means that the most impacting factor, i.e., the
resistance to distortion introduced by the imperfections of the
screen, is a manufacturer issue, where operators cannot inter-
transmission systems and the channel, the cost implementa-
vene. The radio part could be still optimized but many power
tion, the constant envelope property, etc. Therefore, it is a
optimization software have already been implemented, e.g.,
multi-criteria optimization problem which will have different
UL power control, so there are left few opportunities on this
solutions depending on the intended application.
side.
It is important to keep in mind that the device transmitted In cellular communication systems the choices from the 2G
power is the dimensioning factor of wireless networks. The until the 4G have always targeted an increase of the SE, taking
reception capabilities of the mobile and its sensitivity define into account the constraints of non-linearity of the PA.
the network deployment especially for sub-urban and rural
The GSM system provides good SE due to its Gaussian
•
areas. The receivers quality i.e., sensitivity, transmitted power,
filter introduce in the form of Gaussian Minimum Shift
noise floor, is usually defined by standardization bodies. The
Keying (GMSK). Moreover being a constant envelope
required performance is the result of hard negotiations be-
modulation, the non-linear amplifier of the radio front-
tween operators and manufacturers with very tight tolerances.
end does not affect its performance. Naturally, being
The question then is what can be done from the energetic
a modulation with two states, it could not meet the
point of view to enhance the mobile performance and the
requirements of higher data rates.
network global consumption? This question has two possible
In 3G the used Wideband Code Division Multiple Access
•
answers, 1) increasing the receiver sensitivity, which would
(W-CDMA) transmits Quadrature Phase Shift Keying
allow reducing the BS transmitted power, and therefore saving
(QPSK) which means a double capacity for the same
energy and 2) increasing the receiver transmitted power in the
symbol period.
uplink, which in theory would allow to have a higher Inter
With the possibility, among other modulations, to transmit
•
Site Distance (ISD) between BSs and therefore reducing the
the 64-QAM (6 bits transmitted per symbol), LTE has
amount of needed sites. For instance, +1 dB transmitted at the
allowed a significant capacity increase compared to pre-
receiver side is equivalent to around -10% of BSs. In the first
vious generations. The throughput increase is higher than
case the gain can be limited since currently there is not linear
the allocated bands are wide, which justifies the choice
relation between the BSs radiated power and their consumed
of the OFDM multicarrier modulation. The disadvantage
power. In the second case it implies a huge investment because
is that due to its principle of multiplexing several signals
sites’ acquisition is very difficult to obtain. This is why, in the
in parallel, OFDM produces high values of the Peak to
present circumstances, the performance of receivers is more
Average Power Ratio (PAPR), which limits its EE. This
favorable to capacity improvements in terms of QoS or Quality
problem can be handled in the case of the downlink, but
of Experince (QoE) than energy savings.
it is not as simple for the uplink for which a different
G. Modulation: compromise between spectral and energy ef- modulation scheme, the Single-Carrier Frequency Divi-
ficiency sion Multiple Access (SC-FDMA), has been selected.
The choice of digital modulation for a given transmission Other examples such as WiFi and WiMax show that for
system is based on two main criteria, 1) the SE whose target is high-speed connectivity systems, the choice goes toward mod-
to occupy a minimum bandwidth to transmit a given amount of ulations with large number of states, e.g., 256-QAM for the
information with a given QoS, and 2) the EE, which includes IEEE 802.11ac, coupled with a multi-carrier transmission in
the power required for transmission and with the recent green wide frequency bands. In contrast, short-range, low speed
trend, the consumed power by the circuits. The impact of the connectivity systems use modulations with low number of
circuits consumption is considered in some research papers states. Thus, with the Offset-QPSK modulation in ZigBee, as
and by national and international consortia and projects such the I and Q channels are shifted by half a symbol time, a
as GreenTouch, Earth, Ecohome, GreenComm, etc. constant envelope property is obtained. Bluetooth, having the

same constraints in terms of EE uses GFSK modulation which autonomic functions) allows today to have a more global
has very similar properties to the GMSK one. view of managed systems leading to more significant gains.
This brief overview can also be interpreted from the fun- SON function allows acting upon a certain number of network
damental principles established by Shannon in information parameters in allowing optimizing any KPI, see Figure 14.
theory that show that if we increase the spectral efficiency We describe here the prerequisites for managing a Green
the EE is reduced and vice versa. Two choices in modulations
with different characteristics illustrate this postulate. On the
one hand, if the number of states M of a QAM is increased
we obtain the M-QAM which increases its SE and decreases
its EE. On the other hand, if the number of states M of a FSK
modulation is increased, we obtain the M-FSK, increasing its
EE and decreasing its SE.
This type of analysis, performed without considering the
circuits power consumption, is still valid as far as it is applied
to long and medium-range communications i.e., distance of
around hundred meters or more. Contrary, for short-range sys-
Fig. 14. Unified management framework
tems, whose number is expected to grow with the small cells
and the arrival of the 5G, the circuits consumption changes
network, with a special focus on the radio access network.
the relationship between SE and EE. In this case the EE not
We explain the network management functional blocks that
only depends on the energy used for the transmission but also
allow taking into account these prerequisites. We utilize the
on the one dissipated in the circuits. In the example above,
Unified Management Framework (UMF) solution proposed
the total energy for M-QAM will not increase monotonically
in the framework of the FP7 European UniverSelf project
with M, but there will be a value of M that will minimize the
[30] due to its simplicity. It is noted that this solution is
overall consumption. Determining this optimal point supposes
equivalent to the Generic Autonomic Network Architecture
the availability of sufficiently precise transmission and con-
(GANA) standardized by ETSI AFI [31]. The specificity of
sumption models of the different circuits. In practice, analysis
the radio access network is its complexity which is related,
can be limited to certain key blocks. It is well known that the
among others, to the different, possibly overlapping radio
analog part represents the largest power consumption, while
access technologies on the one hand, and its heterogeneity
at the level of the digital baseband processing, the blocks to
namely the coexisting macro-, pico-, femto-cell and WLAN
take into account are the Fourier transform at transmission and
access points on the other hand.
reception for multi-carrier systems and the channel decoding
Among the requirements for Energy Efficient management
part at the receiver.
of the network are (non-exhaustive list):
Finally, please notice that the optimization problem of
Monitoring of the energy consumption of different net-
•
the overall energy consumption does not only concern the
work segments / access technologies.
modulation and can be applied to other physical layer blocks,
Update of the time profile (at different time scales) of the
•
particularly to the MIMO systems dimensioning.
traffic demand per access technology, per geographical
zone etc. Such profiles can be used by policies to activate
rules of SON functions, to construct new rules or to refine
VI. NETWORK CONTROL
existing ones.
Nowadays, the IT-ization of telecommunication networks
Introduce EE policies allowing:
•
opens a new area of self-managed networks. The IT-isation that
– to direct traffic towards the most EE infrastructure
consists of replacing any dedicate element by a controlled and
(traffic steering),
programmable element brings about flexibility and elasticity
– to configure network parameters and thresholds or
in the network management. This approach to put in place
Radio Resource Management (RRM) parameters,
governance policies which are adapted for the operator needs
– to activate SON functions such as sleep mode, off-
(QoS, energy, latency etc.) as a function of its network
loading traffic towards less energy consuming net-
specificities such as implantation, capacity, user profiles, etc.
work nodes, etc.
Consider for example the low consumption modes. Nowa-
Guarantee conflict free operation of SON functions; es-
days, these functionalities operate individually and locally. •
tablish activation order, priorities and time scales of SON
A network element can turn into idle mode when traffic
functions and policies in general (orchestration).
to be served is low or null, independently of its neighbors,
the geographic situation, or the existence of other elements The requirements are mapped onto the functional architec-
allowing to physically or functionally take over in case of ture of the UMF which comprises the following three Core
break down/emergency recovery. This is the very basic of Blocks:
a green network. In fact, the introduction of Self Organized Governance: managing the network using policies that
•
Networks (SONs), or autonomics (a system empowered by control the network by means of SON functions. The

policies consist of rules that translate high level objectives data demand and operator green requirements. However, such
into low level objectives and commands for the SON a solution would not be possible without an automatic assess-
functions. ment of traffic demand not only at a single node level but at
Coordination/orchestration: responsible for the inter- regional level. Actual sleep modes, which operate at a single
•
operation of autonomic functions: triggering and ordering node level, are effective.
SON functions; avoid conflicts, enforce stability and
Anyhow, the next step is to extend them toward global
jointly optimize (possibly coupled) SON functions.
solutions that will allow a large area control without loss of
Knowledge: responsible for managing information in the
•
QoS. A global operator policy could then specify the region,
UMF system: collection, aggregation, storage, processing
i.e., rural, urban, dense urban, and the period, i.e., night, day,
and distribution of information. Knowledge building from
rush, or even the days when activating such solutions based
data for UMF needs (e.g., refinement of policies or
on traffic demand autonomics.
orchestration mechanisms).
This technology allows disposing of green governance
which combines several levers. Among the SON functions that
Network transformation
could be designed for green networking are:
Turning off elements that serve low traffic and steer it to
•
For a green network transformation there have to be intro-
their neighboring nodes.
duced software and hardware considerations. From the soft-
Turn off superposing technologies (for example
•
ware perspective the solution should be to implement a global
GSM1800 with respect to GSM 900) during off-peak
green controller. It would manage the network depending
hours.
on the operator objectives in each scenario. Many efforts
Modulate the activation of capacity elements as a function
•
driven by Network Virtualization Function (NFV) are ongoing
of traffic and maintain the connectivity.
towards building an operating system to make networks recon-
Let us take a practical example of how to manage the
figurable. Ideally a green algorithm should be comprehensive
network using autonomic approaches. Starting from the daily
and look for the holistic optimal performance of the network,
traffic profiles we know that users data demand is approxi-
controlling the NFV functions in order to find the tradeoff
mately x5 during rush hours compared to night time. Access
between capacity, QoS, latency, energy, etc. From the hardware
networks need then to adapt their performances to fulfill the
perspective the objective is to have zero consumption at zero
huge capacity demand during rush hours while this capacity
load. In what follows more details are given and Figure 16
has to be downsized during the night. A first stage study
summarizes the network transformation perspectives.
performed at Orange Labs evaluates the use of policies that
allow the network to switch from a green network to a
capacity network and vice versa depending on the traffic load. 1) A global Operating System dedicated to green. This
For example, Figure 15 presents results for a classic macro OS will administrate our policies and orchestrate the
deployment in an urban area. When traffic load achieves λ 1, network operating functions in accordance with our
results show that the best policy is to activate the capacity policies. The administration functions and policies are
network. It allows increasing the spectral efficiency by a factor now being developed at Orange Labs in parallel with
of 7. Software Defined Networks (SDN) and NFV programs.
This program should then incorporate green policies at
the beginning to allow multi-objective optimization of
our networks. For example, in rural areas, for wireless
networks, a policy could be stated to foster EE rather
than SE while, during rush hours, the contrary could be
imposed during a short period.
2) Self-organized functions are now being tested and de-
ployed to allow an automatic control and optimization of
our networks. Those SON functions have to be managed
taking into account usage analytics back-propagated
from customers to the network management system.
3) Build hardware that consumes almost zero energy when
no service is delivered and therefore enhance the propor-
tionality between consumed and delivered energy. This
concept was purely theoretical some years ago but is
Fig. 15. Network with SON approaches
now well accepted by our suppliers especially for future
This study shows that a global solution could be operated networks (5G, switching and routing).
to adapt the network performances regarding the customers

are available. However, those features need to identify which
services should be hosted in big DCs, which ones could be
moved closer to users, or both.
Rich content and often accessed web content can be stored
in CDNs. The CDN is a large distributed system of servers
deployed in multiple PoPs, each in a small DC. The new gener-
ation point of presence: NGPoPs, across the Internet, will host
the new virtualized CDN, vCDN. The CDN and future vCDN
can help reduce subscriber churn, facilitate development of
value-added services and reduce traffic on the core network.
Fig. 16. Green network transformation
Indeed, the CDN and NGCO (see below) deployment is now
acted and some traffic will be soon offloaded from big DCs.
VII. ADAPTING NETWORKS ARCHITECTURE TOWARDS Content providers such as gaming, media companies and e-
commerce vendors pay CDN operators to host and deliver
GREEN
their content to their audience in a more efficient way.
A. Distributed content using CDN and NGPoP
At the same time, operators are in general interested in
Data centers (DCs) are technical sites with high reliability
delivering the most frequently used/rich services with the less
requirements. They are an important part of the networks and
hops as possible. The idea should be then to optimize the
they represent about 20% of the total Group technical energy
content distribution in such a way that upper layer elements
consumption. Today in Orange, we have less than eighty DCs
can be switched to sleep mode or at least partially deactivated
[32]. For a long time research in this area has been focused on
as often as possible. Particularly, in [33] the authors study two
two levers, thermic and power distribution systems. These two
scenarios and show for both of them that important saving
levers allow acting on the Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE)
in terms of energy, yearly monetary and bandwidth can be
which represents the consumption overhead of the site techni-
achieved.
cal environment compared to consumption of ICT equipment.
The works in this field, notably the ones undertaken at Orange B. The Next Generation Central Office
Labs, have led to highly innovative solutions such as direct
Next-Generation Central Offices (NGCOs) or edge offices
air free cooling, exothermic building etc. Notice that these
comprise the service edge of the network where service and
solutions allow handling the problem of sites support systems
subscriber management, routing and transport infrastructure,
consumption but they do not act in the equipment consumption
and customer support infrastructures reside. The Central Office
level.
(CO) is more or less the collection node of the access before
There are many issues regarding green DCs, among which:
transport and core networks.
• How to make less energy greedy ICT equipment: hard- It is worth mentioning that if decentralization is on the
ware issue related to electronics. road for the core and DCs, the access is getting more and
• How to optimize their effectiveness: software issue re- more virtualized. Indeed, current COs are built separately for
lated to operating load. fixe and wireless networks. Those COs are now getting more
• Consolidation vs distributed architecture. and more importance as the two networks are converging
Today, many levers towards green in this field are already and evolving. In the fixed network, the cohabitation between
addressed within Orange Group: metering, optimization, ICT Passive Optical Networks (PON) and ADSL impose a new
equipment performance evolution, i.e. speed, CPU, temper- deployment optimization while in the wireless network the
ature ranges, scalable hardware consumption depending on separation between the radio head (radio part) and BBU
servers load. A special task is ongoing in many Orange (processing part) open the door to new BBU hotels, cloud
countries to consolidate DCs, targeting to replace old ones and virtual RAN architectures. All these options should be
by a reduced number of bigger DCs. This initiative is very analyzed from an energetic point of view.
beneficial as it will allow impacting directly the global con- An internal study showed that the optimum distance be-
sumption of the group through a reduced number of sites. tween broadband customers and their related CO as well as a
However, Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) which are func- mobile user from the BS would be about 20 Km. This would
tional elements of a larger functional structure named Point reduce the number of COs by 80% [34]. Figure 17 represents
of Presence (PoP) hosted in a small DC are being deployed the current and future network architecture. The current COs
in many Orange regions in order to enhance QoS and also would be replaced by the NGCOs and its associated CDNs.
to deliver dedicated services. These PoPs are now studied It is worth mentioning that a CDN could be installed at
regarding optimal deployment. Basically, big and small DCs national or a regional scale. As presented in Figure 17, some
will coexist and an optimal solution should be studied since functionalities of the DCs could be descended to the NGCOs
they pull in opposite directions. In this domain, many research while, some functionalities currently running at the Access
initiatives are conducted essentially by INRIA, Mines Nantes. Point (AP) level such as ePC, v-BOX, mobile GW could be
Innovative solutions such as load balancing and sleep modes ascended to the NGCOs.

The idea is to turn off all or part of the network elements
according to the data flow. These features are beginning to
be integrated in the telecom sector but their effectiveness face
important challenges i.e., even when there is no traffic there
is always signaling traffic. This does not allow a full sleep
mode and therefore having significant energy savings, for more
details see Section V-C.
On the other hand, the signaling is becoming more com-
plex and traffic demanding. Much of today’s signaling is
produced by API-type applications, which constantly perform
requests to the network for updates, keep awake and other
information needed for their operation. This traffic generated
Fig. 17. Network future architecture
by smartphones is completely independent of the user behavior
(background traffic) and nowadays it consumes up to 50% of
The basic idea behind NGCO and the integration of small- radio resources.
DCs is the possibility to serve informations and services to Ongoing researches since 2011 study the feasibility of
our users with a very low latency in a sort of a close loop separating user data and the signaling. The interest of doing
that avoid long distance bits traveling and rooting around the so is large:
world. Of course, this principle would work if the most energy For green: separation allows to switch off not necessary
•
consuming services are the ones installed close to the user. traffic elements and maintain the signaling traffic required
Furthermore, if those popular services are led down in the to maintain connectivity.
network, part of the transport and core network would be off- A new business model: separation allows sharing signal-
•
loaded and put into sleep mode. ing between several operators, and even the emergence
Nevertheless, we can do a parallelism with the issue of wire- of new actors such as coverage operators working in
less access network densification introduced by heterogeneous B2B mode. Whereas the data network is managed by
networks, i.e., in terms of energy consumption, is it better traditional operators. This idea would allow sharing the
to have a centralized or a decentralized solution?. Namely, network while maintaining the competitiveness since tra-
for the future network architecture, is it better to have a big ditional operators keep control of their traffic assets and
DC (always active and far from users) or several small CDN therefore manage the network capacity.
(closer to customers and activated dynamically)?
Almost all manufacturers agree on this idea. In terms of
The answer is not simple since we would probably need
green it means to have BSs without signaling. In theory,
both architectures. Ideally, from the EE point of view, the
this would allow to completely switch off these BSs in the
number of active network elements that allow the user to get
case where there is no user traffic demand. In other words,
its information should be as low as possible. Specific studies
the station consumes zero Watts when traffic is zero. This
to deal with this issue have to be launched.
idea emerged in the GreenTouch consortium. These BSs are
In conclusion, the integration of NGCOs and CDNs in the
called “slave” and operate in synchronization with BSs called
network architecture could introduce important gains in terms
“master” which provide users connectivity. The first models
of EE due to the reduction on the network components and the
will come out in less than two years for small cells since their
possibility of switching to sleep mode some network elements,
use is consistent with this principle and furthermore, they
arriving to a sort of flatter/decentralized network architecture.
reduce the interference. Finally, this idea will take little time
A study in Orange Labs showed a high impact on the total
to pass from fundamental research to the field and the arrival
COs consumption i.e., a reduction of around 30% [35].
of phantom small cells will allow judging the operability of
such a solution. The studies performed within GreenTouch
C. Share signaling and keep the useful traffic
have shown that such a solution coupled with the sleep mode
The digital traffic is the dimensioning element in terms of
can reduce the overall consumption of the RAN by a factor
network capacity. Since the beginning of fixed and mobile
of 6 compared to a conventional network with 2020 traffic
networks it is a performance indicator and a constraint ele-
model. This technology could be easily implemented for
ment. The traffic is always expressed with the same metric,
macrocells but it requires further studies for its deployment
namely the volume of bytes passing through a system, but
since studies presented by GreenTouch showed that it could
its nature is more and more heterogeneous. For instance, we
not be efficient [36].
can distinguish between two types of traffic 1) users traffic or
traffic that is requested by users and 2) signaling traffic which
represents all the information exchanged for the establishment, VIII. DATA CENTERS, SERVERS AND SOFTWARE
routing and management of the communication. In the mid-90s the internet became of public use. The
The so-called dormant methods reduce the energy consump- first Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL) deployment
tion of network elements when they have nothing to transmit. in France dates from 1997. Among many other things, the

success of this technology has been given by the combination hardware becomes faster. We can then talk about the Bloat-
of two factors, i.e., the very low oil prices (10to 20 per ware. All those heavy softwares can be seen as a technical
barrel) associated with the Moore’s law, which states that the debt that we try to compensate throughout its life cycle.
computational capacity of microprocessors doubles every 18 Also a significant reduction of the ICT environmental foot-
to 24 months. Therefore, up to now, all the internet assets print will depend on the development of simplified hardware,
(e.g. PCs, terminals, ICT equipment, software developments, implying an important reduction in the energy consumption,
DCs, etc) have been designed and developed without strong which goes against the current momentum. Initially, this could
constraints in terms of energy consumption. be feasible only by an awareness-raising of the developers
DCs encompass both ICT equipment it hosts and technical on the constraints of energy consumption of the applica-
environment required for hosting them. Due to the reasons tions/software they develop. To do this, tools to monitor the
mentioned above, their consumption is impacted at several application/software energy consumption should be provided.
layers, each one magnifying the inefficiency of the lower one. Then, the second step is to provide developers with recommen-
dations on more sober patterns. This requires identifying the
right coding style for different technologies following green
A. Software eco-design
patterns.
The chipset computational and information processing ca-
Indeed, software eco-design can be applied to all coding
pacities have evolved in such a way that they seem endless.
technologies, so it is irrelevant to catalog technologies in a
This has led to the development of a very rich programming
greener scale since each one has its own use and field of
technology but also highly resource consuming. Namely, Intel
application. Also, it is important to drive studies for each
continues to develop more powerful microprocessors which
coding technology to identify the impact of the main sequences
allow Microsoft building up richer software releases. For
implemented by developers in terms of power consumption.
instance, Windows Office 2000 can run on a Pentium 75 MHz
Finally, an important axis in eco-software design concerns
whereas Windows Office 2007 requires at least a 500 MHz
the functional outline of the application to be developed. An
processor. For instance, the package Windows 7 + Office 2010
application containing multiple functionalities will be more
professional requires 71 times more memory, 47 times more
complex and therefore the consumption of the underlying
disk space and processors delivering 15 times more processing
resources will be more important. To have sober applications,
capacity than the Windows 98 + Office 97 package, to deliver
it is hence essential from the marketing side to consider the
similar services such as text editor, slides editor, spreadsheet,
relevant features for the customer instead of introducing just
overloaded with frivolities and functionalities scarcely used.
in case features.
The requirement for new processor functionalities and there-
Studies in Orange Labs showed that by simply replacing
fore faster processors by latest software suites leads to an ac-
high energy consuming software sequences by sober ones
celerated obsolescence of the old generation electronic devices
energy consumption can be reduced by 7%. Furthermore,
and a significant amount of Waste Electrical and Electronic
if improvements were introduced at the architectural level
Equipment (WEEE). From the software development side, the
using optimized libraries in addition to the optimization of
situation is the same and causes a drastic growth of energy
applications functionalities among others, energy consumption
consumption by networks software elements and especially
could be decreased by up to 40%, as achieved for Orange
by DCs.
application Business Everywhere.
Furthermore, new coding languages (such as Java, Node.js,
As a conclusion, for an actor such as Orange, software eco-
etc) offer rich features but have very poor capabilities re-
design can introduce important savings in terms of OpEx and
garding processors resource management compared to low-
CapEx, i.e., applications consuming fewer resources (OpEx)
level languages such as assembler or C. With these new
and increasing lifetime of its equipment (CapEx). From the
programming languages, if there are resources constraints the
users perspective, benefits are the same, adding the advantage
solution is to find more powerful equipment. That is why it is
of more user-friendly applications.
very common to come to situations were old computers have
difficulties accessing heavy content websites.
B. Ongoing studies in cooling
Additionally, the co-evolution of the smart phone Opera-
tional Systems and the CPU computational capacity should Energy consumption by cooling systems for hosting ICT
guarantee ability to support even poorly designed applications equipment is a major issue for operators and over the top
capable of drying the batteries quickly. The introduction of companies. A cooling system can consume between 20% and
more powerful Gateways and Set-top Box processors as well 50% of the total power of a site.
as stacking software that associated with use cases like Any Standards have helped establishing norms to set the tem-
Time Any Where Any Device (ATAWAD) constrain the use of perature and humidity operating ranges. Telecom equipment
low consumption modes, leading to have devices active 24/7 must normally work meeting these norms in order to achieve
that are used only few hours per day. these ranges. Recent studies [38], [39], [40] show that it is
All these examples confirm what Niklaus Wirth had men- possible to extend the operating ranges of climatic equipment
tioned in 1995, Software is getting more rapidly slower than while maintaining normal operation.

Studies [41] on thermal storage at the building structure other dielectric coolant, as presented in Figure 20. The oil has
show that it is possible to compensate the variations of the the advantage of not being volatile but it is viscous, therefore,
external temperature. This can be achieved by the use of heavy the pumps must be properly dimensioned. The use of a phase
materials, phase-change products and an optimized air flow. change product, such as 3M, must be mastered in the fluid
Several patents [42], [43] on this subject have been presented, evaporation.
one of them is showed in Figure 18.
Fig. 20. Immersion cooling container prototype in Orange Labs
C. Energy storage
France was pioneer with the battery invention of Gaston
Plant. It has more than a dozen research laboratories working
Fig. 18. Caen university prototype (project Opera-Net2)
in this field from which 80% perform basic research. Notably,
These limits are used to define the target temperatures for we find the University of Amiens with world class advances
air conditioners or heaters. One of the first things implemented thanks to the work of Professor JP Tarascon (College of
was to extend the operating ranges to profit of bigger oper- France) and Professor Armand inventor of lithium metal and
ational ranges. Conventional air cooling systems are highly iron battery LiFePO4.
energy greedy and getting close to cooling capacity limits. Orange interests in this domain are not related to funda-
One possible way of achieving substantial improvements is mental research in electrochemistry or in the development
the use of another coolant, e.g., water, oil, diphasic liquid, of mobile devices battery, but in the applied R&D to reach
etc. mass production of low cost advanced batteries with alternative
Liquid cooling technique involves setting up a heat ex- technology to be introduced for network energy backup.
change interface between the ICT system dissipating heat and In some countries, due to energy transition policies that are
the liquid that will absorb this heat. This technology could being implemented, it is expected an important increase in
be even integrated directly to the electronic card following their storage performance and capacity. With the use of smart
strict design constraints so that the liquid flows as closer as grids, during peak periods interesting economical interactions
possible to the card components, see Figure 19. It is needed to can be achieved i.e., peak consumption adjustment using
conduct research on coolants with high thermal capacity and renewable energy and batteries.
low viscosity. The fluids should be studied to identify their It is very important to closely follow this subject since the
physical properties regarding their performance. They must active research on storage can lead to very significant breaks.
be dielectric to prevent short-circuits at cards, non-corrosive To mention some examples, start-ups IonWatt, spin off of the
and environment friendly. Two-phase fluids should be studied CNRS laboratory in Rennes, working in the Redox Battery,
in order to increase the heat transfer performance. an organometallic solution also CEAs start-up.
Finally, it is worth mentioning TESLA marketing break-
through with its launched Lithium-Ion battery (April 2015),
the Powerwall, announced as the solution for energy storage
for a sustainable home at very low prices. This battery will
be produced by the future Tesla-Panasonic Gigafactory. It will
charge using electricity generated from solar panels, or when
utility rates are low, and power the home in the evening. Hard
competition is engaged with other competing technologies e.g.
advanced Lead-Carbon, NiZn and Lithium-Iron.
Orange recommendations in this area are:
The study and introduction of distributed and decentral-
•
ized energy generation. It should bring important security
Fig. 19. Water circuit presented by Nokia in the framework of operanet2
and economic advantages since 1) it guaranties operators
project
to give a reliable and resilience service, independently
Immersion technique consists in immersing servers in oil or from local energy grids and 2) it avoids the energy losses

in transmission and distribution, which range from 8% to sharing of the energy consumption of the different services
15% from the power plant to consumers. delivered by its network. The main aim of these studies was
The use of microgrids which would enable the integration to find levers to lower the global energy consumption based on
•
of different renewable sources of energy, energy storage, hardware characteristics, features and configurations. Recently,
and demand response. The growing interest on the green the focus has been extended to the assessment of the impact
city concept and the recent launch onto the market of of the different services on the energy consumption in order
more affordable batteries and solar panels from compa- to reduce it. First results are already available, as presented in
nies such as Tesla and SunPower show that it is the good Figure 21.
timing for the study of this solution. The energy consumption of a given network can be split
Introduce a demand response program at Orange group. into a load-dependent part that is mainly related to traffic
•
It could derive considerable benefits by reducing the transmission, and a fixed part given by the consumption of
effective consumption by turning off some equipment, the equipment in a standby mode (no data traffic). The fixed
consuming its stored energy or using its renewable energy part may represent a huge chunk of the energy consumption,
sources during peaks. Studies carried by Orange Labs e.g., the fixed consumption of the mobile networks access part
showed that with the introduction of such a program in represents about 50% to 80% of its total consumption. While
the French network the group could gain several hundred the energy repartition of the load-dependent part between
k euros /year. services can be done based on the traffic consumption, the
repartition of the fixed part is still an open question. A solution
IX. MATHEMATICS FOR GREEN
could be sharing uniformly the fixed part between the services
During the last years there has been a reconcile between and another solution could be to use the traffic proportion of
mathematics and information networks which is probably due each service as a basis for the energy sharing. Both methods
to the increase on the degree of freedom offered by the new could be considered as unfair depending on the service, e.g.,
control systems in the telecommunication networks. This trend services like games that generate a tiny fraction of traffic
will continue even with the Network Virtualization Function would prefer a sharing based on the proportion of traffic
(NFV), the separation between the control and the data planes contrary to big players like streaming services who would
and the IT-ization of the network elements. These features rather prefer a uniform sharing as the fixed part that does
would make the network more flexible and most important, not depends on usage.
programmable. This is called networks orchestration. To solve this problem, Orange Labs carried out some
Mathematic allows to develop models and to optimize collaborative research on a sharing method based on coalition
the network performance from input data which are the game concept, the Shapley value. In game theory, the Shapley
orchestration parameters. Metadata or big data sequentially or value, named in honor of Lloyd Shapley, who introduced it in
continuously feed the mathematical models. 1953, is a solution based on cooperative game theory. Five
service categories are considered according to their traffic
A. Game theory for assessing services consumption
volume, i.e., three large players: streaming, web browsing
Game theory studies strategic decision making processes. and file download, and two smaller ones: voice and other
Based on mathematical models, it studies conflicts and coop- minor services. Figure 21 compares the energy consumed by
erations between intelligent rational decision-makers. Initially, the different services when using Shapley-value-based, named
it was introduced in economics to understand the economic Fair in the figure, the uniform sharing between the different
behaviors of firms, markets, and consumers. Today, however, service categories independently of their traffic volumes and
game theory applies to a much wider range of disciplines a proportional share which follows the volume proportions.
such as political science, psychology, computer science, and This result show that Shapely-value-based method is more
biology. The games studied in game theory are well-defined robust towards small services since it reduces their shares in
mathematical objects. The following elements have to be comparison to the uniform approach and fairer towards larger
defined: the players of the game, the information and actions services in the sense that it reduces their shares in comparison
available to each of them at each decision point, and the with the proportional case. This example shows how math-
payoffs for each outcome. ematical tools could be useful in the green research field to
Game theory is a mathematical field that has attracted assess services energy consumption. Particularly, Orange Labs
for several years deep interest from communication network is collaborating with different actors in this field in France, i.e.,
researchers. Notably, two application examples stand out, i.e., Insitut Telecom and Mathematical and Algorithmic Sciences
the medium access games for 802.11 WLAN and the power Lab of Huawei Paris.
control games in CDMA systems. Game theory continues
B. Traffic analytics for energy management
being considered to solve decision making problems in the
network and there is an active research to apply it on routing, Traffic analytics for QoE management are a set of indi-
security, interference control, resource allocation, etc. cators measured from real traffic flows. Those indicators are
Research Studies in Orange Labs used game theory, par- currently used by operators to enhance the QoE and to detect
ticularly the collaborative games, in order to define a fair the optimization points that would improve the global QoS.

periods is one of the main applications of this approach.
Of course, optimization could be done locally but network
elements are linked and a global optimization would allow
avoiding conflicting interactions. This new research field
should be addressed in collaboration with big-data experts,
network control engineers and SON suppliers.
C. Reinforcement learning
Reinforcement learning (RL) consists on learning how to
map situations to actions in order to maximize a numerical
reward [45]. Several methods enable to solve a RL problem
such as Q-learning which is a model-free approach where the
agent behaves randomly without any specific policy.
We applied this approach in [46] in order to orchestrate the
Fig. 21. Service consumption assessment using game theory
ASMs according to the requirements of the network operator
in terms of energy consumption and delay. The control agent
has to decide how many times to repeat each sleep mode level
Analytics can then be viewed as a feedback flow from users
depending on the defined utility. This utility corresponds to the
to the network that allows the operator to adjust and optimize
reward that the agent gets after choosing an action. It can be
the network parameters and controls.
defined as follows:
Orange Labs started a dedicated study in collaboration with
Orange-Cameroun in 2014. This study has focused on network
R = −(cid:15)D + (1 − (cid:15))E (2)
energy failures and the induced traffic losses in wireless access gain
nodes. Based on Call Digital Records (CDR) harvested during
where D is the delay added due to the sleep policy, E is
gain
one year communication, the study showed that it is possible
the energy consumption reduction when using the sleep modes
to secure APs in a form of clusters rather than individually. It
and (cid:15) is a normalized weight ((cid:15) ∈ [0,1]) that denotes the
turns out that:
importance given to the two factors D and E . A small (cid:15)
gain
Energy shortage events are not related to the level of
• means that the EC reduction is prioritized over the delay and
traffic conveyed by the BSs (long term incidents can
vice versa.
occur on large or small BSs).
Figure 23 shows that if we have a high constaint on the
Large cities, such as Douala or Yaound, experienced
• delay (high (cid:15)), we can reduce the energy consumption by 57%
about 10 days (cumulated on one year) of unavailability
without having any impact on the delay. Whereas, when there
due to energy shortage reasons.
is no constraint on the delay (low (cid:15)), we use more the sleep
Also, the study showed that re-enforcing the BSs energy modes, especially the deepest one, and the energy saving is
supply in a 15% allows saving about 40% of the traffic that up to almost 90%. So, depending on the requirements of the
would otherwise be lost. Figure 22 shows that this value goes different 5G use cases, (cid:15) has to be chosen carefully.
up to 43% if the BSs are chosen optimally thanks to an
appropriate optimization model.
90 5
]
%
[
 
n 85 ]
o s
i 4 m
t
c [
u 80   y
d a
e l
r e
  n 75 3 d
o   d
i t e
p d
m 70 d
2 a
u
 
s e
n g
o 65 a
c r
e
  1
y v
g 60   EC reduction A
r
e
Fig. 22. Re-enforced BS energy supply n   Delay
E
55 0
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Many research studies are ongoing trying to take advantage
 variation
of those analytics to optimize ICT networks in terms of
energy consumption. The main advantage of analytics is that
Fig. 23. Performance assessment of the selected policies during the exploita-
it allows a global optimization, rather than a local one. For tion phase
example, balancing the EE with the SE during low traffic

|      | None   |          |    |    |    |
|:-----|:-------|:---------|:---|:---|:---|
|      |        |          |    |    |    |
|      |        |          |    |    |    |
|      |        |          |    |    |    |
|      |        |          |    |    |    |
| EC r |        | eduction |    |    |    |
|      | EC r   | eduction |    |    |    |
| Dela | Dela   | y        |    |    |    |

D. Stochastic process are used, respectively to model the users’ dynamics inside the
cell and the dynamics of the buffer size of the video player.
A Markov chain is a stochastic process describing a se-
The combination of both mathematical modelling allows us
quence of random changes of state in a given space of states.
to optimize the durations the ON/OFF periods i.e., energy
Markov chains are memory less processes, i.e., the next state
consumption and the impact on the QoE.
depends only on the current state and not of the sequence of
events that preceded it. Markov chains are heavily used to
E. Dynamic programming
model a plethora of phenomena in the real world.
Queueing theory is the mathematical study of queues. This Dynamic programming is an algorithmic method to solve
research field was introduced in 1917 thanks to the work of complex problems by breaking them down into simple sub-
Erlang, a Danish engineer specialized on telephone networks problems. It relies on a simple principle, any optimal solution
management. Queuing theory is mainly used in performance leverages itself on sub-problems solved locally in an optimal
analysis and systems optimization. way.
To optimize battery consumption, smartphones manufac-
Currently, the terminals connect to the access network that
turers use different downloads management algorithms for
offers them the best connectivity. This policy could induce
video services. Nowadays, Android-based smartphones use
significant overload on a particular access network. This raises
an “ON/OFF” mechanism where the video player switches
the question of how to distribute traffic between different
between “ON” state when the smartphone simultaneously
customer access networks in order to reduce the energy
downloads and plays the video and “OFF” state when the
consumption guarantying an acceptable QoE. Studies to focus
smartphone stops the radio interface during predefined time
on building models based on dynamic programming in order to
and reads the data stocked in the buffer during the “ON”
solve this issue by allowing the design of decision algorithms
state. This strategy is designed to take into account high
that can dynamically and optimally, from an energy and QoE
abandoning rate of video viewing, i.e only about 35% of
point of view, allocate real-time traffic flows to different access
video are downloaded entirely by the viewers. Therefore,
networks.
given an adequate parameters of the “ON/OFF periods, this
Dynamic programming is expected to have a significant
strategy can reduce the transmission of the unnecessary bytes,
impact on the development of an Operating System (OS) to
hence, reducing the battery consumption at the smartphone
the green. This area of research provides an opportunity for
side and the power transmission at the network side. Figure 24
network operators to optimize in a comprehensive manner their
shows a comparison of the average percentage of downloaded
networks without moving the energy consumption from one
bytes between the ON/OFF strategy and fast caching strategy
sector to another. This question is increasingly present due to
(Normal downloading without OFF period) while viewers for
the conflicting opinions regarding the effects that the cloud or
different video lengths abandoning the video after watching
the network virtualization could have. Dynamic programming
only 25%. In this simulation, we set the ON period to 15
may be the only means to guarantee operators to optimize their
seconds and the OFF period to 50 seconds.
network from end-to-end.
If today the initiatives in this area are rather in a research
phase, the introduction of Networks Functions Virtualization
(NFV) and Software Defined Networks (SDN) in all network
elements in order to make them programmable have speed up
the considerations in this sense. A comprehensive operational
system (Global OS) with a green feature should be conceived
since now in order to place this option in the genes of future
network OSs.
X. CONCLUSION
It is fair to say that the evolution of ICT networks is facing
a huge exponential traffic increase which naturally induces a
constant growth of its energy consumption. Furthermore, de-
ploying new networks without decommissioning legacy ones,
plus the increase of the number of customers asking for always
Fig. 24. Fraction of downloaded data while watching only 25% of the video
more data rates will definitely make the green challenge more
However, a bad parametrization of the ON/OFF periods complicated and challenging. We have then to admit that
might lead to several video freezes due to empty buffers during ICT energy consumption will probably grow in the next 10
the “OFF” periods. years if an aggressive green transformation it is not launched.
Orange Labs teams are working on the mathematical mod- Research works should limit this constant growth and give us
elling and optimization of downloading strategies, in particular the basis of future greener networks conception, operation and
the ON/OFF mechanism. Markov chains and Queuing theory maintenance. For this purpose, we should prepare ourselves to:

Impose green to our suppliers as a mandatory target. This drastically the radiated power without a loss of
•
would not be possible without a large consensus among coverage requirments.
the main worldwide operators. – Design advanced system with energy-free communi-
Co-innovate with our industrial eco-system to fulfill our cationg tags.
•
green requirements. – Build a global green Operating System (OS) which
Buy specific green developments from our suppliers as is necessary to balance between energy and spectral
•
they are ready. efficiency depending on the zone (rural, urban), the
context (social events) and the time period (day,
Through this paper we have highlighted some technolog-
night).
ical levers that would allow accelerating the transformation
towards green networks. In a summary:
The second age of green wireless networks would proba-
Fundamentals show that combining the Shannon limit of
•
bly be more disruptive. Think that many degrees of free-
telecommunication and the Moores law about electronics
dom (e.g. Signal processing, communication protocols,
computational improvement may conduct us to move
antenna systems ... etc) have been revisited and optimized
from a concept that we would name one-big-to-one-big
while the cellular concept is still alive since 1947. The
towards many-small-to-many-small. In other words, green
next generation of green wireless communication will for
and sustainable would be done by moving from point-
sure change the cellular concept to user-centric wireless
to-point concept to massively parallel communications
network. These potential breakthroughs pave the way to
that is already observed with for example Titan-MIMO
the principle of always available on demand and breaking
in wireless communication and highly parallel computing
the cellular concept.
in super servers.
Network control will allow operators to globally control
•
Semiconductors analysis indicates that Gallium is going
•
in real time their networks. Up to now, this super-
to swap silicon in most of telecom applications and es-
controller is being built to manage the traffic flow depend-
pecially for radio equipment. This material is well suited
ing on the targeted quality of service. However, as green
due to its great performances for high voltage and high
is introduced as an important KPI, an ad-hoc orchestrator
frequencies, it also will facilitate the integration between
is necessary to manage conflicting KPIs by setting an
photonics (AsGa) and electronics (GaN) on the same
optimum configuration. For example, rural areas which
chip. The cost of Gallium versus silicon has significantly
represent 70% of the wireless network consumption
decreased (from x4 to x1.5 during the last 3 years). This
should be driven by EE while dense urban areas by
material could be now integrated in core and transport
spectral efficiency. Those studies are now being launched
networks. Extension to the access network which is two
and should be accelerated in the next 3 years.
orders of magnitude bigger than the core in terms of
Network architecture should be simplified and the mi-
•
network elements will be appropriate as soon it will be
gration from numerous legacy central offices to a limited
economically viable.
number of NGCO/NGPoP hosting CDNs must be seen
Optical technologies have already permitted to signif-
•
as an opportunity to be boosted. Additionally, the right
icantly decrease energy consumption of ICT networks
positioning of the contents inside our networks which
(FTTH for Access and optical routing and switching for
is still an open question should be studied via research
Core). Optics, thanks to new components and modula-
studies leveraging our data mining capabilities and mathe-
tions still has a huge potential progress in terms of EE. In
matic tools in order to well-balanced energy consumption
order to go further at the access networks some initiatives
depending on the content location and popularity. The
should be fostered:
challenge is to find the right equilibrium between energy
– Making optical amplifiers supporting rapid switch-
gains, latency requirement and business revenue.
on/switch-off.
Nevertheless, an end-to-end separation between signaling
– Inventing photonic energy consumption scalability
and data planes could give operators a new opportunity by
Radio networks must be particularly focused because
• sharing their signaling networks to decrease their energy
of its tremendous energy consumption induced by multi-
consumption and maintain networks always alive.
layer technologies that are installed and maintained even
Data centers and software eco-design The fast software
•
if some of them transport almost zero traffic. The first
evolution has led to higher hardware resources con-
age of green wireless networks is already improving its
sumption (e.g. last 10 past years memory requirements
efficiency as following :
for Windows 9 vs Win3 has increased by 100). Future
– Increase the hardware efficiency by moving to GaN software versions and applications should be designed
component technology and introducing advanced from a greener perspective. To achieve additional energy
software sleep modes that should allow achieving savings, the use of dynamic VM consolidation algorithms
almost zero consumption at zero traffic. shall maximize the number of inactive servers and by the
– Shift to massively parallel antennas with focusing way putting into sleep mode unused resources. Moreover,
capabilities. High gain antennas will allow reducing oversizing should be restricted to needs for disaster recov-

ery plans and operations. Research should be launched
soon to help operational for managing this important
issue.
Mathematics for green seems to be one of the most
•
promising domains that should be considered in the
near future research trends. Mathematics are suitable for
different domains like:
– Modeling end-to-end energy consumption taking into
account input data uncertainties and controlling their
response probability. Stochastic meta-models allow
overcoming this issue by controlling the response
accuracy depending on the quality of the learning
inputs.
– Managing conflicting KPIs through a green or-
chestration brain is the fundamental building bloc
of future networks. Orchestration will need multi-
objective optimization tools for decision making al-
lowing a non-aggressive and smooth network control. Fig. 25. Technological levers energy impact on network segments
– Pay to play: Future trends are towards assessing end-
to-end services energy consumption sharing induced
REFERENCES
by over-the-top services (google, facebook, tweeter,
..) that may account for 80% of ITN induced energy [1] ITU (2009) ICTs and Climate Change, background paper for the ITU
Symposium on ICTs and Climate Change, Quito, Ecuador, 8-10 July.
consumption in 2020. Game theory will allow a fair
[2] B. Nordman, S. Lanzisera, “Electronics and network energy use: Status
assessment of services energy consumption between
and prospects”, 2011 IEEE Intern. Conf. Consumer Electron. , pp 245-
different players. Those studies could even been 246.
[3] D. Kilper et. al., “Power Trends in Communication Networks” in proc.
extended to give our users their ICT environmental
IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum Electronics, Vol. 17, No.
footprint induced by their usage.
2, 2011.
[4] https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/belllabs-microsite-
It is fair to say that the given technological levers
greentouch/index.html
will have different positive impacts depending on their
[5] M. Gruberet al., “EARTH - Energy Aware Radio and Network Tech-
network segment applicability. For example, the ones nologies”, in 2009 IEEE 20th International Symposium on Personal,
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, Sept 2009, pp. 15.
applicable to the access networks which represent glob-
[6] https://soogreen.cms.orange-labs.fr/soogreen
ally 70% of the ITN consumption will be more energy
[7] Celtic-OperaNet, www.celticplus.eu/project-opera-net2
efficient than those applicable only to the core or transport [8] M. Babacan, “Lobbying and Growth: Explaining Differences among
OECD Countries”, Topics in Middle Eastern and North African
networks. Hence, putting all the pieces together, we have
Economies , Vol. 12, No. 1 , September 2010.
weighted and mapped the proposed technological levers
[9] O. Renais et al., “Migrating to a Next Gen WDM core network”, the
impact on the global ITN consumption picture in Figure 13th International Telecommunications Network Strategy and Planning
Symposium, 2008.
25. Finally, the green domain appears at the intersection
[10] Vlasov, Y. “Silicon CMOS-integrated nano-photonics for computer and
of multiple scientific disciplines (mathematic, physic,
data communications beyond 100G”, Communications Magazine, IEEE,
informatics and economy). It is becoming part of all volume 50, issue 2, pages 67-72, 2012.
[11] B. J. Offrein, “Silicon Photonics for the Data Center,” in Optical Fiber
ICT activities which could be a differentiator criterion
Communication Conference, OSA Technical Digest (Optical Society of
for Orange against its competitors due to its research
America, 2015).
capabilities. Currently, sustainable development is being [12] E. Bonetto, et al., “Facing the traffic explosion in metro transport net-
works with energy-sustainable architectures”, Photonic Network Com-
thought at schools as an independent course and it will
munications August 2015, Volume 30, Issue 1, pp 29-42.
definitely become an engineering ICT branch. Some
[13] http://www.ieee802.org/3/az/index.html
universities have integrated in their masters program [14] Orange requirements book, internal report.
[15] https://www.celticplus.eu/project-operanet/
a green ICT option and operators should support this
[16] “Power Modeling of Base Stations”, 5GrEEn Summerschool Aug. 2014
initiative through our research and development activities.
[17] Green Touch Wireless Power Model, April 2014 Matlab
Therefore, betting for a deep and real green strategy Code and documentation (Doc1, Doc2 and FAQ) at
http://members.greentouch.org/apps/org/workgroup/mobile/
appears as the right path according to ongoing reality.
documents.php?folder id=390
[18] F. E. Salem et al., “Advanced Sleep Modes and Their Impact on
Flow-Level Performance of 5G Networks,” 2017 IEEE 86th Vehicular
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), Toronto, ON, 2017, pp. 1-7.
[19] www.freescale.com
The authors would like to thank Dr. Nissem Selmene for [20] Phan-Huy, D.-T. et al, “Dumb-to-perfect receiver throughput ratio maps
of a time reversal wireless indoor system,” in Proc. 20th International
her work on the design of the Ambient Backscatter at Orange
Conference on Telecommunications (ICT) 2013, Casablanca, 6-8 May
Labs during April 2017 to March 2018. 2013, pp.1,5

[21] Phan-Huy, D.-T. et al, “Adaptive large MISO downlink with Predictor
Antenna array for very fast moving vehicles,” 2013 International Confer-
ence on Connected Vehicles and Expo (ICCVE), pp.331,336, 2-6 Dec.
2013.
[22] Phan-Huy, D.-T. et al, “Making 5G adaptive antennas work for very fast
moving vehicles”, in IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine,
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 71-84, Summer 2015.
[23] Phan-Huy, D.-T. et al, “Frequency Division Duplex Time Reversal,”
in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference 2011 (GLOBE-
COM) 2011, Houston, 5-9 Dec. 2011, pp.1, 5
[24] Liu, V et al. “Ambient Backscatter: Wireless Communication out of
Thin Air”, in Proc. SIGCOMM, 2013.
[25] Van Huynh, N. et al, “Ambient Backscatter Communications: A Con-
temporary Survey,” in IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, May
2018.
[26] Finkenzeller, K. “RFID Handbook, Fundamentals and Applications in
Contactless Smart Cards, Radio Frequency Identification and Near-Field
Communication”, Third Edition, Wiley, 2010.
[27] Lavric, A. et al, “Internet of Things and LoRa Low-Power Wide-Area
Networks:Asurvey,”2017InternationalSymposiumonSignals,Circuits
and Systems (ISSCS), Iasi, 2017, pp. 1-5.
[28] 3GPP TR 45.820 V13.1.0 (2015-11) Technical Report 3rd Generation
Partnership Project; Technical Specification Group GSM/EDGE Radio
Access Network; Cellular system support for ultra-low complexity and
low throughput Internet of Things (CIoT) (Release 13).
[29] Ilab-Cairo study in 2011.
[30] UMF Specifications - release 3, UNIVERSELF project Deliverable 2.4,
2013
[31] Autonomic network engineering for the self-managing Future Internet
(AFI): GANA Architectural Reference Model for Autonomic Network-
ing, Cognitive Networking and Self-Management, ETSI GS AFI 002.
(2011).
[32] Most of these DC are mixed telecom / IT sites, notably in smaller
countries.
[33] R. Modrzejewski et. All “Energy Efficient Content Distribution in an
ISP Network” in proceedings of the 2013 IEEE Global Communications
Conference, GLOBECOM 2013, Atlanta, GA, USA, December 9-13,
2013.
[34] Y. Denis et al, Research paper 2013 - The Next Generation Central
Offices
[35] Denis Y. “The Next Generation Central Offices a breakthrough evolution
scenario for the optical access infrastructure”, Orange research paper,
April 2013.
[36] GreenTouch Technical Solutions for Energy Efficient Mobile Networks
White Paper, 2015.
[37] J. Sekhar, G. Jeba “Energy Efficient VM Live Migration in Cloud Data
Centers”IJCSNInternationalJournalofComputerScienceandNetwork,
Vol 2, Issue 2, April 2013.
[38] S.LeMasson,etal.,“SimplifiedAir-conditioningfortelecommunication
switches”, Telecommunications Energy Conference, 2006, INTELEC
’06, 28th Annual International, Oct. 2006.
[39] S. Le Masson, et al., “New thermal architecture for future green data
centres”, Telecommunications Energy Conference (INTELEC), 32nd
International; Jan. 2010.
[40] D. Nrtershuser et al., “A Step towards green datacenters: Enlarging
climatic ranges Studying the effects of the building”, INTELEC San
Diego 2008.
[41] S. Le Masson et al., “Complex wall for indirect freecooling in datacen-
ters”, Telecommunications Energy Conference (INTELEC), 2012 IEEE
34th International, 01/2012
[42] S. Le Masson , “Procede d’evacuation de chaleur degage a Linterieur
dun local par Ventilation a Debit Variable”, French patent 2 842 588,
issued July 2002.
[43] D. Nrtershuser et al., “Exothermal building”, International patent
PCT/FR2010/052042, issued April 2011.
[44] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fresnel lens.
[45] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, “Reinforcement learning: An introduction”
MIT press Cambridge, 1998, vol. 1, no. 1.
[46] F. E. Salem et al., “Reinforcement learning approach for Advanced
Sleep Modes management in 5G networks,” 2018 IEEE 87th Vehicular
Technology Conference (VTC-Fall), Chicago, 2018, pp. 1-5.