Systemic Risks in CCP Networks
Russell Barker, Andrew Dickinson, Alex Lipton, Rajeev Virmani∗
April 1, 2016
6102 rpA 1  ]FM.nif-q[  1v45200.4061:viXra
Abstract
We propose a model for the credit and liquidity risks faced by clearing members of Central
Counterparty Clearing houses (CCPs). This model aims to capture the features of: gap risk;
feedback between clearing member default, market volatility and margining requirements; the
different risks faced by various types of market participant and the changes in margining re-
quirements a clearing member faces as the system evolves. By considering the entire network
of CCPs and clearing members, we investigate the distribution of losses to default fund con-
tributions and contingent liquidity requirements for each clearing member; further, we identify
wrong-way risks between defaults of clearing members and market turbulence.
∗All of the authors are employees of Bank of America. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent the views of Bank of America.
Page: 1

1 OVERVIEW
1 Overview
Since the Financial Crisis of 2007-2010 the number of trades and the range of products that are
cleared by CCPs has increased enormously.
There is a clear need for a bank to assess any potential impact of defaults of general clearing
members (GCMs) through the CCP network and, in particular, on themselves. However, under-
standing the risk is a challenging one, since, it requires understanding the contingent cash-flows
between a large number of agents (hundreds of GCMs and multiple CCPs), see Figure 1 for an
example of a real-world CCP network. Further, the inter-relationship between the GCMs with
each other via the CCPs is a complex one, requiring capturing the dynamic evolution of varia-
tion margin (VM), initial margin (IM), default fund contributions (DF), porting of trades in the
event of a member default and allocation of default losses. Further, the fact that a particular
GCM’s CCP activity may only represent a fraction of their broader economic activity should
be captured. Although the system is too complex to analyze analytically, it is viable to develop
simulation models which capture the contingent cash-flows between all agents (including those
related to margining and defaults), and address the following important questions related to the
broader application of central clearing to OTC derivative portfolios:
• Potential systemic risks and contagion introduced by the interconnected nature of the
system.
• Liquidity issues driven by: P&L; changes in margining; losses due to default; CCP recap-
italization.
• The connection between market volatility and default likelihood.
• Identification of the key points of failure.
• The magnitude of scenarios proving sufficiently large in order for a given clearing member
to incur a loss or suffer liquidity issues.
One of the novel points of the model proposed in this paper is that it considers the entire
network of CCPs and GCMs which, given its size and complexity, is somewhat challenging and
yields some important insights:
• There are material cross-risks between the default of GCMs and market volatility which
must be captured in order to realistically assess default losses and contingent liquidity
requirements.
• Our results do not support the fear that the move from bilateral clearing to central clear-
ing of OTC derivatives poses a significant threat of contagion through the central coun-
terparties, primarily attributable to the magnitude of risks being a comparatively small
proportion of the capital held by the diversified financial institutions dominating the CCP
membership.
A wide variety of models have been developed in order to quantify potential exposure of
CCPs. These models can be divided into three main categories: statistical, optimization and
option pricing based models.
Statistical models typically assume simple underlying dynamics, such as Geometric Brownian
Motion (GBM) and derive the probability for the Initial Margin (IM) to be exceeded within a
given time horizon. A typical paper along these lines is Figlewski (1984) [12] who calculated
the probability of a margin call given a certain percentage of initial and maintenance margin.
Optimization models, as their name suggests, try to set margins in a way that achieves an
appropriate balance between resilience of CCPs and costs to their members. In particular, Fenn
and Kupiec (1993) [11] and Baer, France and Moser (1995)[1] built models for minimizing the
total sum of margin, settlement and failure costs.
Option pricing based models capitalize on the fact that the exposure profile of a CCP is
approximately equivalent to the payoff of a strangle, representing a combination of a call and a
put option. A GCM has a theoretical opportunity to default strategically if the contract loses
more value than the posted IM. Day and Lewis (1999)[8] considered margined futures positions
Page: 2

1 OVERVIEW
Figure 1: An Example Network of CCPs (coloured circles) and GCMs (black dots) with corre-
sponding coloured edges denoting membership
as barrier options and estimated prudent margin levels for oil futures for the period 1986 to
1991.
Since the most important problem from the CCP standpoint is to analyze losses conditional
on exceeding margin, Extreme Value Theory (EVT) is well suited for this purpose and had been
exploited by several researchers, see, e.g., Broussard (2001)[4] and Longin (1999)[16]. Whilst it
is relatively easy to use EVT to set up margins for a single contract, it is much more difficult at a
portfolio level, hence CCPs tend not to use EVT directly. Accordingly, in many cases CCPs use
Standard Portfolio Analysis of Risk (SPAN) methodology instead, see Kupiec (1994)[14]. While
intuitive and appealing, SPAN has significant limitations when used to calculate margins for
complex portfolios. Accordingly, value at risk (VaR) based margining system gained considerable
popularity. Application of VaR methods to large complex portfolios was discussed by Barone-
Adesi et al. (2002)[2].
Duffie and Zhu (2011) [9] discuss the premise that central clearing of derivatives can sub-
stantially reduce counterparty risk. They argue that some of these benefits are lost through a
fragmentation of clearing services due to no allowance for inter-operability across asset classes
and/or CCPs. They measure the tradeoff between two types of netting opportunities: bilateral
netting between counterparties across assets, versus multilateral netting among many clearing
participants across a single class of derivatives, and argue that benefit of one over the other
depend on the specifics of the clearing process.
In Glasserman, Moallemi and Yuan (2014), the authors discuss issues pertinent to managing
systemic risks in markets cleared by multiple CCPs. Since each CCP charges margins based on
positions of a clearing member, it creates incentives for swaps dealers to split their positions
among multiple CCPs. This splitting causes the ‘hiding’ of potential liquidation costs from each
individual CCP, thus underestimating these costs.
Borovkova and El Mouttalibi (2013) [3] analyze systemic risk in CCPs by utilizing a network
approach. They show that the effect of CCPs on the stability of the financial system is rather
Page: 3

1 OVERVIEW
subtle. According to the authors, stricter capital requirements have a clearer and stronger
positive impact on the system than mandatory clearing through CCPs.
Cont and Avellaneda (2013) [5] develop an optimal liquidation strategy for disposing a
defaulted members portfolio. Parts of the portfolio are sold by auction, parts are unwound,
and the rest is sold on the market. Their approach evaluates issues of market liquidity under
adverse conditions. It models an auction with constraints applied on how many positions can
be liquidated on a given day, and detemines an optimal sale strategy to minimise market risk.
The authors construct an objective function and optimise over SPAN scenarios using linear-
programming.
Cumming and Noss (2013)[7] assess the adequacy of CCPs’ default resources from the per-
spective of the Bank of England. They argue that the best way to model a CCP’s exposure to
a single GCM in excess of its IM is by applying Extreme Value Theory (EVT). The authors
propose using a simple analogy between the risk faced by a CCP’s default fund and the one
borne by a mezzanine tranche of a Collateralized Debt Obligation (CDO). The authors use
an established framework to model co-dependence of defaults based on a gamma distribution;
although the reader should note the caveat that the model assumes that exposures and defaults
are uncorrelated, which is unlikely to be the case. Moreover, the analogy between CCPs and
CDOs is a loose one, GCMs of a CCP are very different from credits used to construct CDOs.
Still, the model is unquestionably a useful step towards building a proper top-down statistical
framework for assessing of the risk of a CCP’s member exposures.
Murphy and Nahai-Williamson (2014) [17] discuss approaches to the analysis of CCP DF
adequacy. They start with a range of design choices for the default waterfall and discuss regula-
tory constraints imposed on the waterfall. The authors concentrate on the cover 2 requirement
because it is a minimum internationally acceptable standard for a CCP. Their contribution is
two-fold - (a) it is shown how to use market data to estimate the complete distribution of a
CCP’s stressed credit risk; (b) the prudence of cover 2 as a function of the number of GCMs is
examined.
Elouerkhaoui (2015) [10] develops a method for calculating Credit Value Adjustment (CVA)
for CCPs using a CDO pricing approach by defining the payoff of the CCP’s waterfall and
using the Marshall-Olkin correlation model to compute it. The author considers a CCP as
one of the counterparties a GCM faces in the market place and derives the Master Pricing
Equation with bilateral CVA, as well as Funding Value Adjustment (FVA) and Margin Value
Adjustment (MVA). Cr´epey (2015) [6] pursues a similar approach. While well thought through,
their approach suffers from the fact that defaults of GCMs (and hence the CCP itself) are not
directly linked to the behavior of the cleared product.
We feel that although a lot of advances have been made in the recent literature some of
the most important features of the CCP universe have been missed. The first is the feedback
mechanism that intrinsically links GCM default, market turbulence, and liquidity calls on mar-
ket participants. The second is the individual nature of different clearing members: from large
diverse financial institutions where markets will make up a minority of their business to propri-
etary funds for which a default event will be purely driven by margin calls on cleared trades.
The third is the interconnectedness of the CCPs themselves meaning that it is important to
model the network in its entirety. Finally it is important to model the changes in IM and
DF requirement as the system evolves; this is particularly important for modelling liquidity
considerations.
The approach we follow is to use the minimum amount of information necessary to analyse
the risk of contagion or a liquidity crunch in the CCP framework but still build a realistic
simulation of what might occur in a stressed situation. For each GCM and each CCP we need
to model the loss over IM and DF if that GCM were to default in a specific market scenario and
how to distribute that loss to other GCMs. We also need to be able to model the circumstances
of a GCM default given a market scenario and link this to the reduction in the GCM’s capital
due to losses on a number of CCPs.
In this paper, we develop a simulation framework to investigate the risks associated to
central clearing. The paper is structured as follows: in Section 2, we discuss margining and its
Page: 4

2 MARGIN CALCULATION
Data Inputs / Information Requirements  Step I: Construct T Portfolio   Step II: Price t Portfolio and 
  CCP:    Estimate CCP and G0 C  M capital  calculate fina0 n  cial metrics 
• Product Portfolio: Products cleared on CCPs and 
valuation change with underlying market 
    CCP CCP CCP
• Membership and Capital structure: CCP capital at  1            2        ……………    m 
stake, list of clearing members and their positions, 
 
• s D D ai cFz e re  f oia  no su   sf al    t   td d  hme e ef fa e  a Gu t uh Cl lt o Mt  ,f d  u m son , l e md o t. g h e  y o c: hd c a a f nolc ir su   mdla i  s ft t oi rn rig b  d  ul eo t fis n is ng  io n lv o ge s  ar s  neIM ds    and       • • • G G …C C …M M     1 11 2    • • • G G …C C …M M     2 21 2    • • • G G …C C …M M     m m1 2    • C foo rm  t 0p  Mut ae r  kin ep t u dt a p taa  rameters 
dealing with a CCP collapse   • ……  • ……  • ……  • Calculate t Portfolio MTM 
GC   • ……  • …  …             ………•..…  …  Calculate G0 C 
Ms:  Description of each GCM including:  • M: VM, IM, DF 
     
• Traded positions for each trade type on each CCP 
• Capital available to cover VM and CCP losses  • ……  • ……  • …… 
• Probability of GCM default dependent on a given  • GCM  1n  • GCM  2n  • GCM  mn 
market scenario 
 
Market Scenario / Market Data: 
• Description of a stress scenario and translation 
into market data 
Step III: Price tPortfolio and 
i 
calculate impact 
Step IV: GCM Default Management 
Any GCM  • Simulate market/economic 
Defaults?  data for period t 
No  i 
No  • Simulate changes in 
Yes  portfolios 
• Calculate losses through  • Calculate change to VM, 
waterfall *  IM, DF over that period 
End of Time 
Horizon?  • Redistribute defaulted GCM  • Calculate any GCM defaults 
portfolios randomly  over that period due to a) 
Yes  • Resolve any CCP defaults  insufficient capital to cover 
liquidity charges b) non-
End  CCP driven default 
* Please refer to ‘CCP Default Management Waterfall” for more details 
Figure 2: Schematic of CCP Model
modelling; in Section 3, we present the process by which we generate the portfolios of clearing
members given the partial information a particular GCM possesses; in Section 4, we present
the simulation of the underlying market variables and the feedback mechanism used to generate
realistic co-dependence between volatilities and defaults; we present numerical results in Section
5 and conclude with Section 6.
2 Margin Calculation
CCPs set-up extensive processes to manage the default of any GCM including requiring their
GCMs to post an Initial Margin (IM) and a Default Fund (DF) contribution as well as Variation
Margin (VM) to cover the MtM moves of the exposures together with a Risk Waterfall process
that stipulates how any eventual losses would be distributed among the defaulting clearing
member, the non-defaulting members and the CCP itself. Given a set of market data and a
portfolio of trades we need to be able to calculate VM, IM and the DF for the total set of GCM
portfolios on a given CCP.
T
We represent the state of the market at time t by X(t) = (X (t),...,X (t)) , where X (t)
1 n i
represents a financial quantity such as a par swap, spot FX rate, credit spread etc. We describe
the generation of these scenarios in Section 4.
The incremental VM called over the time interval [t ,t ] for the portfolio held by GCM ,
i i+1 k
with CCP , is given by the change in mark-to-market
j
(cid:88)
GCM GCM
V M k (t ) − V M k (t ) = V (X(t ),t ) − V (X(t ),t )
CCP i+1 CCP i φ i+1 i+1 φ i i
j j
φ∈ΦGCMk(t
)
CCPj i
where the summation is over all trades, φ, in the portfolio GCM holds with CCP at time t
k j i
and V (X(t),t) is the value of trade φ at time t in market state X(t).
φ
We need to construct a fast method for calculating GCM ’s IM on CCP based on its
k j
portfolio and the market at time t . Generally, the IM is dominated by a VaR/CVaR component
i
Page: 5

| 0       | 1       |
|:--------|:--------|
| •GCM 11 | •GCM 21 |
| •GCM 12 | •GCM 22 |
| •……     | •……     |
| •……     | •……     |
| •……     | •… …    |
| •……     | •……     |
| •GCM 1n | •GCM 2n |

| Step III: Price ti Portfolio and   |
| calculate impact                   |
|:-----------------------------------|
| •Simulate market/economic          |
| data for period ti                 |
| •Simulate changes in               |
| portfolios                         |
| •Calculate change to VM,           |
| IM, DF over that period            |
| •Calculate any GCM defaults        |
| over that period due to a)         |
| insufficient capital to cover      |
| liquidity charges b) non-          |
| CCP driven default                 |

2 MARGIN CALCULATION
of the portfolio over a set of market changes derived from a historic time period supplemented
by a set of deterministic add-ons for liquidity, basis risk etc. c.f. Avellaneda and Cont [5]. We
split the IM into a VaR/CVaR component and a set of add-ons. In practice, the VaR/CVaR
component is calculated across the portfolio losses as follows:
• Create a set of scenarios by looking at a set of 5-day change in market data over some
historic period.
• Weight these changes by a multiple of the ratio of current to historic realized volatility.
• Create new scenarios using the current market data and the set of market changes and
calculate the 5-day loss on the portfolio for each scenario.
• Calculate the VaR or CVaR using these.
We calculate separately the VaR/CVaR component using regression against a collection of
representative portfolios and then apply the add-ons deterministically: firstly, we evaluate the
IM on a set of portfolios which are sufficiently small so as to not incur any add-ons and the IM
on these are calculated using the full IM calculation process; secondly the IM for the current
portfolio is calculated as
(cid:16) (cid:17)
GCM
IM k (t) = V aR {X(u)} ;a(t) + AddOn(t) (2.1)
CCP u≤t
j
T
where a(t) = (a (t),...,a (t)) represents the regression coefficients of the portfolio held at
1 n
time t against the small benchmark portfolios for which IM has been calculated in the first step,
(cid:16) (cid:17)
V aR {X(u)} ;a(t) represents the VaR component of the IM for a portfolio represented by
u≤t
these regression coefficients and adjusted for new simulated market data taking into account:
1. The change in the ratio of current market to historic volatilities. This can be estimated
by keeping track of the historic multiplier and adjusting appropriately.
2. If the new scenario creates a loss large enough to replace one of the VaR or CVaR elements1.
We ignore the contribution to the volatility of the add-on in (2.1) and we freeze it to the time
0 value.
To take Point 2 above into account, we heuristically model the historical loss distribution of
the portfolio by a one-parameter family of distributions (such as the family of centred Gaussian
distributions) fitted to the level of the IM at the previous time-step and update according to
whether the realization of the loss over the current time step is sufficiently extreme.
The total default fund at time t is given by a ‘Cover 2’ principle
(cid:104) (cid:105)+
GCM GCM
DF (t) = maxmax LOIM k (t,σ) + LOIM l (t,σ) − K (2.2)
CCP j σ∈S k(cid:54)=l CCP j CCP j CCP j
j
where the maximum is over all stress scenarios, S , for CCP and distinct pairs of (surviving)
j j
GCM
GCMs GCM ,GCM and the loss over IM, LOIM k (t,σ), is given by
k l CCP
j
 +
(cid:88)
LOIMGCM k (t,σ) =  (V (t,X(t)) − V (t,Xσ (t))) + IMGCM k (t)
CCP  φ φ CCP 
j j
φ∈ΦGCMk(t)
CCPj
the summation is over trades, φ in the portfolio ΦGCM k (t) and V (t,Xσ (t)),V (t,X(t)) are
CCP φ φ
j
the values of φ at time t in market state X(t) with and without the stress scenario, σ, applied.
We remark that although CCP’s define a large number of stress scenarios, typically, there are
1We assume that a VaR/CVaR scenario does not roll off the historic period specified; this is a reasonable assump-
tion as most CCPs include the 2007-2012 period and have ensured that this will not drop out of the historic period
in the near future and the time horizons for our simulations are around 1 year.
Page: 6

3 GCM PORTFOLIOS
comparatively few ‘binding’ scenarios and the scenarios may be replaced with a significantly
smaller subset.
Although there may be a variety of ways to allocate the DF amongst members, we shall
assume it to be pro-rated among the surviving members according to their IM:
GCM
χ IM k (t)
DFGCM k (t) = τ k>t CCP j DF (t)
CCP j (cid:80) χ IMGCM l (t) CCP j
l τ l>t CCP
j
where χ denotes the survival indicator of GCM .
τ >t k
k
3 GCM Portfolios
In this section, we take the perspective of a particular (but arbitrary) clearing member and
discuss how it may assess its risks making use of the partial information available to it. It is
not uncommon for a banking group to have multiple subsidiaries, each of which are distinct
clearing members. We write {GCM } for these subsidiaries whose positions with each CCP
k k∈K
are known to the group. To aid discussion let us introduce a name for this banking group, ‘XYZ
Bank’. We refer to the gross notional as the total notional over long and short positions and the
net notional to be the difference. The reader should note that risks are ultimately determined by
net positions and hence net notionals are of primary concern; however, gross notionals provide
useful and important information of accumulated historical volumes.
Although XYZ is potentially exposed to the positions of other members in the event of
their default, the positions of other members are unknown. However, gross notionals for certain
categories of derivatives, aggregated across all members, are published by the CCP where the
categories are typically discriminated by the type of trade, currency and tenor. For example,
a CCP may publish the aggregate gross notional for fixed vs 6M EURIBOR swaps for tenors
in the range 2y to 5y (alongside other aggregates). We wish to make use of these aggregate
gross notionals as a measure of the relative scale of the exposures of the CCP in different trade
types, currencies and tenors. For this reason, it is appropriate to align our methodology to the
categorization used by the CCP’s when reporting aggregate gross notionals. Below, we will fix
a particular category, π ∈ Π where Π represents the set of all categories used by the CCP to
disclose aggregate gross notionals.
To assess XYZ’s risks, we propose a randomization scheme to explore the space of valid con-
figurations of the unknown positions of other GCM’s, subject to the constraints of reproducing
the known information: values related to XYZ’s positions and the aggregate gross notionals
published by the CCPs. To each GCM, k, we assign a rank J ∈ {1,...,n}, based upon
k
data sourced from publicly available information, such as financial statements. We then fit a
two-parameter exponential distribution to the gross notional of the members, motivated by the
analysis of Murphy and Nahai-Williamson [17]
n
(cid:88)
βπ exp(−απJ ) =Nπ (3.1)
k
k=1
(cid:88)
βπ exp(−απJ ) =Nπ (3.2)
k K
k∈K
where K is the set of indices of XYZ’s members, Nπ,Nπ are the gross notional for category π ag-
K
gregated over all members and XYZ’s members, respectively. The system is solved numerically2
for απ,βπ and we abbreviate the fitted net notional for k as
Nπ = βπ exp(−απJ ).
k k
2Abel-Ruffini suggests that there is no analytic solution for this set of equations except in a few trivial cases.
Page: 7

4 SCENARIO GENERATION
{∆π}n
We generate randomized net notionals, , such that long and short positions net
k k=1
n
(cid:88)
∆π = 0 (3.3)
k
k=1
and
∆π ∈ [−RNπ,RNπ], ∀k (3.4)
k k k
∆π = δπ, ∀k ∈ K (3.5)
k k
where R ∈ [0,1] is a parameter controlling the relative size of the net and gross positions and
{δ } , are the known net positions for XYZ. R may be thought of as a proportional trading
k k∈K
delta limit and, for reasons of parsimony, we assume that the parameter does not depend upon
the GCM, k, nor the product classification, π. Of course, this assumption could be weakened if
appropriate.
Introduce the negative total sum of all known positions, ∆¯π = −(cid:80) δπ, define the ratio
k∈K k
rπ = ∆¯π/(cid:80) Nπ, and use it to proportionally allocate ∆¯π among GCMs with k ∈/ K,
k∈/K k
∆¯π = rπNπ. Without loss of generality we assume that |rπ| < R. For each k ∈/ K consider the
k k
interval Iπ = [−(R − |rπ|),(R − |rπ|)] and generate independent random numbers uπ uniformly
k k
distributed on Iπ. Define the following quantities
k
Uπ
(cid:88) (cid:88)
Uπ = uπNπ, V π = uπNπχ , Wπ = , (3.6)
k k k k uπ kU>0 V π
k∈/K k∈/K
where χ is the indicator function. Since uπ possesses a density, it is clear that V π (cid:54)= 0 almost
k
surely and Wπ is well-defined, and 0 < Wπ ≤ 1. Define net position of the k-th GCM as follows
∆π = ∆¯π + uπ (cid:0) 1 − Wπχ (cid:1) Nπ = (rπ + uπ (cid:0) 1 − Wπχ (cid:1) )Nπ. (3.7)
k k k uπUπ>0 k k uπUπ>0 k
k k
In words, we proportionally reduce positions for GCMs with uπ having the same sign as Uπ,
k
and keep positions for other GCMs fixed. A simple calculation yields
Uπ
(cid:88)
∆π = ∆¯π + Uπ − V π = ∆¯π, (3.8)
k V π
k∈/K
|∆π| = (cid:12) (cid:12)∆π − ∆¯π + ∆¯π(cid:12) (cid:12) ≤ (cid:12) (cid:12)∆π − ∆¯π(cid:12) (cid:12) + (cid:12) (cid:12) ∆¯π(cid:12) (cid:12)
k k k k k k k (3.9)
≤ |u | + |rπ|Nπ ≤ (R − |rπ| + |rπ|)Nπ = RNπ,
k k k k
so that both conditions for ∆π, k ∈/ K, are satisfied.
k
4 Scenario Generation
In this section, we describe the model for the underlying market variables that is used to evolve
the system of GCMs given the initial positions generated according to the scheme presented in
Section 3. We wish to ensure that the model is sufficiently rich so as to:
1. Support jumps, allowing for comparatively large changes on short time scales, including
systemic jumps affecting all market variables simultaneously,
2. Reflect that periods of high default rates will be accompanied by high market volatility
(as was observed during the crisis).
For these reasons, we will propose a regime-switching model with regimes driven by the number
and size of realized defaults.
Page: 8

4.1 Regime-Dependent Drivers 4 SCENARIO GENERATION
4.1 Regime-Dependent Drivers
For each GCM, GCM , we introduce a weight w > 0 representing the financial significance of
k k
(cid:80)
the GCM to the others and normalized so that w = 1. Practically, we set these weights to
k k
be proportional to the balance sheet assets of each GCM.
We introduce a stress indicator, Ξ , by
t
(cid:88)
Ξ = w e−θ Ξ{t−τ k}χ
t k τ <t
k
k
which yields a value between 0 and 1, representing the materiality-weighted defaults prior to
time t, τ the default time of GCM , θ represents a rate of mean reversion from a stress state
k k Ξ
to equilibrium and will be set to 1 in the sequel.
We introduce some thresholds 0 < m < m < ··· < m = 1 determining the stress state,
1 2 S
and define the stress state process, ξm taking its value in {1,...,S} by
t
(cid:26)
1, Ξ ≤ m
ξm = t 1
t i, m < Ξ ≤ m ,i ≥ 2.
i−1 t i
We introduce 1 = Λ < ··· < Λ which represent volatility multipliers in each of the S stress
1 S
states.
ξm
We will consider Brownian drivers, W , with regime-dependent volatilities so that condi-
t
Wξm
tional on the stress state ξm, the volatility of is ξm:
t t
(cid:68) (cid:69)
d Wξm ,Wξm = Λ2 dt.
ξm
t t
ξm
Similarly, we will consider regime-switching compound Poisson driver, N , where, conditional
t
on the value of ξm, the intensity of the Poisson process is λΛ , the jump distribution is as
t ξm
t
proposed in Inglis et al. [15] being equal in distribution to the random variable
eZ − 1
where Z ∼ N (µ,σ). The Poisson driver is compensated so as to be a martingale
(cid:104) (cid:12) (cid:105)
E Nξm − Nξm (cid:12)F = 0
u t (cid:12) t
for u ≥ t.
We remark that the underlying simulation generates the regime-dependent Wiener and Pois-
son processes via a numerical scheme based upon superposition of standard Wiener and Poisson
processes over a regime-dependent number of states. This ensures comparability across different
regimes for a particular realization.
We describe the usage of these drivers below. Note that, losses on default and liquidity drains
are primarily driven by increments in the value of portfolios over short time horizons, for this
reason, questions related to measure-dependent drifts and second-order convexity adjustments
are neglected. All processes will be assumed to have a sensitivity to a common regime-dependent
sys,ξm
Poisson process that we denote by N .
t
4.2 Rates Process
Interest rates in the ith economy are simulated by analogy to a simple 2-factor Hull-White
model:
dNsys,ξm dNi,ξm
dri =dφi + dX1 + dX2 + β ri + ri (4.1)
t t t t i t− t t− t
dW1,ξm
dX1 = − θ X1dt + σ
t 1 t t t
(cid:16) ρdW1,ξm (cid:112) ρ2dW2,ξm(cid:17)
dX2 = − θ X2dt + ασ + 1 −
t 2 t t t t
Page: 9

4.3 FX Process 4 SCENARIO GENERATION
Nsys,ξm ,Ni,ξm
where φi is deterministic (used to fit the initial term structure); are compound,
t t t
compensated, regime-dependent Poisson processes of the form considered above representing a
systemic (resp. idiosyncratic) jump process; β represents the sensitivity of rates to the systemic
i
1,ξm 2,ξm
jump process; W ,W are regime-dependent Wiener Processes of the form considered
t t
above which, conditional on ξm are independent; σ is a deterministic function of time; α,θ ,θ ,ρ
t 1 2
are deterministic constants used to control the relative volatility of rates of different tenors and
intra-curve spread volatilities and t− denotes left-hand limit. As described below, we calibrate
the parameters to historical, rather than implied, market data.
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Market observables (swap rates, libor rates) are calculated from the state X1,X2 by ap-
t t
plying the functional forms derived from the corresponding (affine) two-factor Hull-White model
(without feedback and jump terms).
The above model may be viewed a minimally complex model that has the key features of:
• Jumps so as to allow extremal events over short time-periods.
• Regime-dependent volatilities and intensities so as to capture the natural increasing co-
dependence with defaults.
• Intra-curve spread volatility, so as to ensure a reasonable PL distribution for delta-neutral
steepener/flattener positions.
4.3 FX Process
We model the spot FX analogously, with the spot FX between the ith and jth being governed
by
i,j i,j i,j i,j,ξm i,j sys,ξm i,j i,j,ξm
dX = σ X dW + β X dN + X dN (4.2)
t t t t i,j t− t t− t
i,j
where σ is a deterministic function of time, β is the sensitivity to the systemic jump process
t i,j
Nsys,ξm Ni,j,ξm
and is an idiosyncratic jump process independent of all else conditional on ξm.
t t
4.4 Non-CCP Asset Process
We model the non-CCP assets of the kth GCM by a process of the same form as (4.2).
σkAkdWk,ξm dNsys,ξm dNk,ξm
dAk = + β Ak + Ak (4.3)
t t t t k t− t t− t
where each parameter is analogous.
4.5 Default Events
The default of each GCM is then determined by a structural model inspired by the Merton-
Black-Cox model. More precisely, the default time of the kth member is determined as the
hitting time of the total position of CCP-related and non-CCP related activities
(cid:8) (cid:9)
τ = inf t > 0 : Ck − Ck + Ak ≤ Bk
k t 0 t t
where Bk is a deterministic barrier; Ak is as above and represents non-CCP assets; Ck−Ck is the
t t t 0
net cash-flow due to CCP-related activities (see below). The barriers are calibrated numerically
so as to reproduce target default probabilities.
According to the business model of the member, the contribution to the volatility of a
particular member’s net assets attributable to CCP related activity, C , and non-CCP related
t
activity, A , may vary considerably among members. It is useful to categorize members as
t
follows:
1. Large diversified financial institutions for which their assets are dominated by non-CCP
related activity, A .
t
Page: 10

4.5 Default Events 4 SCENARIO GENERATION
Figure 3: Schematic of CCP Loss Allocation Waterfall
2. Large markets-driven houses where the trading book makes up a significant part of their
business and for which the volatility of C is substantial relative to that of A .
t t
3. Trading houses for which the volatility of C may exceed A .
t t
Once the total loss for a given CCP has been calculated we need to distribute the losses
across the remaining GCMs and go through the standard waterfall process. In reality, the
method applied will vary considerably between CCPs and depend on the outcome of the auction
process, which is not amenable to fine modelling. Instead, we simply distribute the losses among
the surviving GCMs in proportion to their IMs, as though all surviving GCMs bided equally
in the auction process. Similarly, we redistribute the net positions to all surviving members
proportionally to the size of their IM. Figure 3, provides a schematic of the loss allocation
waterfall.
Finally we need to consider how to model the situation where the losses exceed all of the
CCP’s buffers. Namely, that the losses exceed the total DF and any ‘end of the waterfall’
mitigation measures the CCP has in place. We make the assumption that surviving GCMs’ will
make good the variation on the value of cleared trades up to the time of default of the CCP
and then at this point all trades cleared on the CCP will be unwound at par. All losses will be
divided in the ratio of the surviving GCM’s closing IMs. As there has never been a major CCP
default, it is difficult to say how realistic this resolution is3. However the authors of this paper
believe it to be a reasonable and parsimonious modelling assumption.
We may summarize this mathematically, as the incremental cash-flows being represented by
(cid:88) (cid:88)
Ck − Ck = − IMGCM k (t) − IMGCM k (0) + V MGCM k (t) − V MGCM k (0)
t 0 CCP CCP CCP CCP
j j j j
CCP CCP
j j
(cid:88) (cid:88)
GCM
− LossIMDF k (t ,t )
CCP i i+1
j
CCP t <t
j i+1
3One other possibility is that some combination of the government and the members step in and take over the
running of the CCP however this would add unnecessary complexity to the model.
Page: 11

5 RESULTS
GCM GCM
where the summation is over all CCPs, IM k (t),V M k (t) are the IM and VM margin,
CCP CCP
j j
GCM
LossIMDF k (t ,t ) the loss over IM and DF for a CCP over time interval (t ,t ]
CCP i i+1 j i i+1
j
allocated to GCM is given by
k
CCP
χ IM j
LossIMDFGCM τ k>t GCM
k (t ,t ) = k LossIMDF (t ,t ) (4.4)
CCP j i i+1 (cid:80) χ IMCCP j CCP j i i+1
l τ l>t GCM
l
with the total loss over IM and DF for CCP given by
j
 −
(cid:88) (cid:88)
LossIMDF (t ,t ) =  (V (t ) − V (t )) + IMGCM l (t ) + DFGCM l (t ) ,
CCP j i i+1  φ i+1 φ i CCP j i CCP j i 
l:τ l∈(t i,t i+1] φ∈ΦGCMl(t
)
CCPj i
(4.5)
with the summation over those GCM’s (if any) that have defaulted in the time interval (t ,t ].
i i+1
The length, t − t , of time intervals in the simulation is aligned to the time horizon corre-
i+1 i
sponding to the VaR methodology of the CCP (5 business days).
5 Results
In this section, we present results for a realistic configuration of the model. We take the per-
spective of a generic general clearing member ‘XYZ Bank’ proxying one of the ‘big four’ US
banks in scale, but with anonymized positions set to be a fixed proportion of the outstanding
gross notional of each of LCH.SwapClear and CME for USD and EUR fixed-float swaps. There
are a large number of inputs to the model, the setting of which were performed as follows:
• The parameters describing market dynamics (volatilities, jump intensities, jump distribu-
tions and β’s) were estimated based upon historic data of suitable representants (eg. 10y
swap rate). The systemic jump factor was proxied by a basket of financial equities.
• GCM and CCP data were based upon publicly available data from the CCP and supple-
mented by financial quantities sourced from financial statements of members.
• We consider a 2-regime configuration of the model, and conservatively4 set the value of the
stress-regime volatility multiplier, Λ = 2, and the boundary between regimes, m = 0.05.
2 1
• We suppose there to be 101 clearing members, each members of both of the two CCPs.
We wish to consider the distribution at a 1-year time horizon of: (1) the losses due to defaults
(of other GCMs and CCPs); (2) potential liquidity drains on XYZ Bank. These distributions are
scaled by the shareholder equity of XYZ bank since we wish to size the relative significance of
losses to capital buffers and understand the qualitative impact of feedback on the loss distribu-
tion. For the purposes of the example presented here, we set this to 200 BN USD, approximating
the magnitude of the shareholder equity of a ‘big-four’ US bank.
Although we take the perspective of XYZ bank, we reiterate that we take into account the
contingent cash-flows between all agents in the CCP network. We study the dependence of these
distributions in different configurations: defaults with the feedback-based regime-switching (la-
belled ‘Feedback’); defaults only (labelled ‘Default Only’); no defaults. We have made use of a
minimal entropy path-reweighting algorithm so as to ensure that the expected stress indicator,
E[Ξ ], is held fixed as we change settings of the feedback mechanism so as to ensure compa-
1
rability of the results across configurations. The plots are for the complementary cumulative
distribution functions with the y-axis on a logarithmic scale so that, for example, a y-value of
0.01 corresponds to a 99% quantile of the loss distribution.
4 The relative realized volatility of EUR rates over the period of the crisis of 2008 to the period 2011-2016 was
estimated to be 1.57
Page: 12

5 RESULTS
1 
0.0%  0.1%  0.2%  0.3%  0.4% 
0.1 
Feedback 
No Feedback 
0.01 
0.001 
Figure 4: Logarithmic plot of CCDF of Ratio of Losses Due to Default to Equity (%) of XYZ Bank
at time horizon of 1y with and without feedback (logarithmic scale)
1.00 
0.0%  0.1%  0.2%  0.3%  0.4%  0.5%  0.6%  0.7% 
0.10 
No Default 
Default Only 
Feedback 
0.01 
0.00 
Figure 5: Plot of CCDF of Ratio of Terminal IM-Initial IM to Equity (%) over both CCPs of XYZ
Bank at time horizon of 1y for different model configurations (logarithmic scale)
Page: 13

| 0% 0.1% 0.2% 0.3% 0.   |
|:-----------------------|
|                        |
|                        |

| 0% 0.1% 0.2% 0.3% 0.4% 0.5% 0.6% 0.   |
|:--------------------------------------|
|                                       |
|                                       |

REFERENCES
Figure 4, presents the simulated distribution of the ratio of the losses due to default (across
all of XYZ’s members and CCPs) to its shareholder equity and demonstrates two key points:
firstly, the effect of feedback dramatically amplifies the tail of the loss distribution due to de-
fault, reflecting the importance of capturing the natural wrong-way risk between defaults and
market volatility; secondly, even taking into account the interconnected and complex relation-
ships between the agents of the CCP network, and making conservative assumptions concerning
the relationship between defaults and market volatility, the scale of the losses are unlikely to
threaten the survival of a well-diversified and well-capitalized financial institution.
Figure 5, presents the simulated distribution for the ratio of the additional aggregate IM to
shareholder equity required by XYZ Bank posted to the two CCPs in the system. This captures
the effect of new extremal events entering the VaR lookback period and potential increases in
portfolio size due to the porting of defaulting members’ portfolios5. The results demonstrate the
significance of capturing the likely increase in volatility in stressed market conditions; further,
it indicates that in dollar-terms liquidity drains due to margining are likely to exceed losses due
to default.
6 Conclusions
Understanding the risks associated to central clearing is technically challenging, since it requires
understanding a large network of GCMs and CCPs and the complex interactions between them
associated to margining, default fund contributions and loss waterfall structures. We have
presented how, using suitable heuristics, a faithful reflection of the contingent cash-flows between
all of the agents in the CCP network may be simulated and the associated risks investigated.
Based upon a model capturing the likely feedback between defaults and volatility, we have
presented results which indicate that the tail losses and increased liquidity requirements require
careful modelling so as to capture the substantial wrong-way risk between volatility of market
variables and defaults, further, liquidity risks dominate those related to credit risk. Suggesting
that, when it comes to members assessing the risks and costs associated to their central clearing
activities, their primary focus should be on funding and liquidity.
The fear that the wider application of central clearing to OTC derivatives will have a desta-
bilizing impact on the financial system due to contagion effects transmitted through CCPs are
not supported by our experiments. Primarily, this is attributable to, even conservative bounds
on, losses due to default and contingent liquidity requirements being a small fraction of the tier
1 common equity of the diversified financial institutions that dominate the CCP membership.
Although, the reader should note any CCP-related losses are likely to be realized precisely under
the extreme circumstances where the members are least able to absorb them.
Disclaimer: All of the authors are employees of Bank of America. The views expressed
in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of Bank of
America.
References
[1] H. Baer, V. France, and J. Moser, Opportunity Cost and Prudentiality: an Analysis of Fu-
tures Clearinghouse Behaviour, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, OFOR Paper
No. 96–01, 1996
[2] G. Barone-Adesi, K. Giannopoulos, and L. Vosper, Backtesting Derivative Portfolios with
Filtered Historical Simulation, European Financial Management, Vol. 8, No. 1, pages 31–58,
2002
5The volatility-scaling of the VaR described above is not included.
Page: 14

REFERENCES REFERENCES
[3] S. Borovkova, and H.L. El Mouttalibi, Systemic Risk and Centralized Clearing of OTC
Derivatives: A Network Approach, SSRN Preprint 2013
[4] J.P. Broussard, Extreme-value and Margin Setting with and without Price Limits, Quar-
terly Review of Economics and Finance, Vol. 41, No. 3, pages 365–385, 2001
[5] R. Cont, and M. Avellaneda, A new risk management approach for central counterparties’,
SSRN Preprint 2013.
[6] S. Cr´epey, Central Clearing Valuation Adjustment, Presentation, Global Derivatives, Am-
sterdam, 2015
[7] F. Cumming and J. Noss, Assessing the adequacy of CCPs’ default resources, Bank of
England, Financial Stability Paper No. 26 – November 2013
[8] T. Day and C. Lewis, Margin Adequacy and Standards: An Analysis of the Crude Oil
Futures Market, Vanderbilt University, FMRC Working Paper 96–20, 1999
[9] D. Duffie and H. Zhu, Does a Central Clearing Counterparty Reduce Counterparty Risk?
Rev Asset Pric Stud Vol. 1, No. 1, 74-95, 2011
[10] Y. Elouerkhaoui, CVA for CCPs Using a CDO Pricing Approach, Presentation, Global
Derivatives, Amsterdam, 2015
[11] G.W. Fenn and P. Kupiec, Prudential Margin Policy in a Futures-Style Settlement System,
Journal of Futures Markets, Vol. 13, No. 4, pages 389–408,1993
[12] S. Figlewski, Margins and Market Integrity: Margin Setting for Stock Index Futures and
Options, Journal of Futures Markets, Vol. 4, No. 3, pages 385–416,1984
[13] P. Glasserman, C.C. Moallemi and K. Yuan, Hidden Illiquidity with Multiple Central Coun-
terparties, SSRN Preprint 2014.
[14] P. Kupiec, The Performance of S&P 500 Futures Product Margins under the SPAN Margin-
ing System, Journal of Futures Markets, Vol. 14, No. 7, 1994
[15] S. Inglis, A. Lipton, I. Savescu and A. Sepp, Dynamic credit models, Statistics and Its
Interface Vol. 1 2008
[16] F. Longin, Optimal Margin Level in Futures Markets: Extreme Price Movements, Journal
of Futures Markets, Vol. 19, No. 2, pages 127–152, 1999
[17] D. Murphy and P. Nahai-Williamson, Dear Prudence, won’t you come out to play? Ap-
proaches to the analysis of central counterparty default fund adequacy, Bank of England,
Financial Stability Paper No. 30 – October 2014
Page: 15