Quantitative Description of Strong-Coupling of Quantum
Dots in Microcavities
8002 guA 32  ]llah-sem.tam-dnoc[  1v5123.8080:viXra
F.P. Laussy∗ , E. del Valle† and C. Tejedor†
∗
School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Southampton, United Kingdom
†Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Facultad de Ciencias C-V, Cantoblanco, Madrid, Spain
Abstract. We have recently developed a self-consistent theory of Strong-Coupling in the presence of an incoherent pump-
ing [arXiv:0807.3194] and shown how it could reproduce quantitatively the experimental data [PRL 101, 083601 (2008)].
Here, we summarize our main results, provide the detailed analysis of the fitting of the experiment and discuss how the field
should now evolve beyond merely qualitative expectations, that could well be erroneous even when they seem to be firmly
established.
PACS: 42.50.Ct, 78.67.Hc, 42.55.Sa, 32.70.Jz
Strong-Coupling (SC) is the term consecrated by the QD that is strongly coupled to the cavity, there are many
quantum optics community to designate “quantum cou- other dots in weak-coupling, that also get excited by the
pling”, where coherent interaction dominate over dissi- electronic pumping, and that populate the cavity when
pation. A vivid picture represents this regime in terms of they de-excite. This, for the SC dot, is perceived as an
a cyclic exchange of energy between the light and matter incoherent cavity pumping.
fields (the so-called “Rabi oscillation”). This oscillation Even in the simplest description where the two modes
is a particular case as can be seen straightforwardly by (light, a, and matter, b) are bosonic, the luminescence
considering two conceptual cases where it does not oc- spectra enjoy a wealth of subtle characteristics when
cur: when the system is in an eigenstate of the SC hamil- incoherent and continuous pumpings P for the cav-
a/b
tonian, in which case it has no dynamics, and when it has ity/exciton, are introduced.Those are discussed at length
reached a steady state (SS), where, regardless of which in Ref. [4]. Here we mention the most important ones:
quantum state is realized, energy is balanced rather than anticrossing is not systematically observed for a system
exchanged. The SS is the relevant case for many ex- in SC, dependingon whether the system is more photon-
perimental configurations with semiconductors [1, 2, 3], like (P > P ), or more exciton-like (P > P ). More sur-
a b b a
where a continuous incoherent pumping excites the sys- prisingly, an “apparent” anticrossing can be observed in
tem. An anticrossing is looked for in the luminescence a system that is in weak-coupling, due to an interference
spectra as a proof of SC, attributed to the emergence of that carves a hole in the spectra. These two facts together
“dressed” states. disconnect completely an anticrossing behaviour from
To compute a luminescence spectrum of a QD in a the realization of SC. One should not, therefore, rely on
semiconductor, one must consider an innocent-looking this qualitative effect to ascertain SC. Instead, a fitting of
but important consequence of pumping: it enforces a thedatashouldbeattempted,soas toplaceagivenexper-
steady state that is a mixture of cavity photons and ex- iment in a region of SC defining rigorously the dressed
cited state of the QD (exciton). The lineshape of the states, rather than from their ability to survive in the lu-
w
cavity luminescence spectrum S( ) depends strongly on minescence spectrum.
whether the system is photon-like or exciton-like [4], We have considered one of the pioneering experi-
in the sense of which particle would be injected in the ment [1], as a test of the model, and found an excellent
system in the limit of vanishing pumpings that keep a agreement with a linear (bosonic) model, cf. Fig. 1, pro-
fixed ratio as they go to zero. The steady state should be vided that both cavity and exciton pumping are taken
computed self-consistently from the interplay of pump- into account. This is consistent with the experimental
ing and decay, rather than assuming that the system is, curves that feature a strong cavity emission. In panel (b)
typically, in the excited state of the QD. The latter as- we show how the lineshapes transform when the cav-
sumption would be reasonable if there was only one kind ity pumping is switched off: the exciton line dominates,
of pumping, namely in this case an electronic pumping. and no anticrossing is observed. The system is neverthe-
However, experimental evidence seems to imply that an less still in SC. The confrontation of the theory with the
incoherent cavity pumping accompanies the electronic experimental data was done for illustration only, as the
pumping [5]. The most likely reason is that beside the raw experimental data was not available by the time of

FIGURE 1. Theoretical fit (in semi-transparent red) of the data by Reithmaier et al. digitized from Ref. [1] (blue). The
model [4] provides S(w ) = 21 p Re(cid:229) s =−1,1 G +i[s R+1 w+ −s C (w +w )/2] with G ± = (g a−P a± (g b−P b))/4, R = pg2− (G −+iD /2)2,
+ a b
D = 2g (g aP b−g bP a)(iG +−D /2)/g2G +(P a+P b)+P a(g b−P b)(G 2 ++(D /2)2) and C = G −+i(D /2+gD)/R. The data has been
fitted on rescaled axes for numerical stability by a Levenberg–Marquardt method with N S(w )−c, with N and c to account
for the normalization and the background. Beside these two necessary parameters regardless of the model, each panel only
has P and w (c) as fitting parameters. g and g have been optimized globally, with best fits for g = 61m eV, g = 220m eV
a/b a/b a/b a
andg =140m eV. (a)showsthe anticrossingfromcurves1–15 puttogether.(b)keeps allfittingparameters thesame butwithP =0
b a
and vanishing P . The dot emission now dominates and no anticrossing is observed, although the system is still in strong-coupling.
b
our investigation. We have therefore digitized the data, achievements made in terms of quantum emitters with
what forbids an in-depth statistical analysis, since the these systems. This would also provide a meaningful
experimental points are required rather than the inter- and quantitative comparison between the various imple-
polated curves published in Ref. [1], if only to know mentations (micropillars, microdisks and photonic crys-
the numbers of degrees of freedom. Note that one ex- tals). Lacking the full experimentaldata, we have merely
pects better still results as ourprocedureaddednoise.We been unable to providea confidenceinterval to our most-
found the best agreements near resonance, which might likelihoods estimators. Doing so, progress will be mean-
be due to the exciton that, when it is less-strongly cou- ingfully quantified, and claims—rather than ranging be-
pled at larger detunings, may go below the resolution tween likely and convincing—will become unambigu-
of the detector, resulting in an apparently broader line. ously proven (within their interval of confidence).
All these limitations can be circumvented with a care-
ful statistical analysis (and treatment of the data to re-
construct linewidths below the experimental resolution). REFERENCES
This is a standard procedure of a mature field to vali-
date a theoretical model over another by statistical anal- 1. J. P. Reithmaier et al., Nature 432, 197 (2004).
ysis of the experiment.Nullifyinghypothesessuch as: “a 2. T. Yoshie et al., Nature 432, 200 (2004).
3. E. Peter et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 95, 067401 (2005).
Fermi (two-level) system accounts for the observed data
4. F.P.Laussyet al., arXiv:0807.3194 (2008).
better than a Boson model” are important to assess the
5. F.P.Laussyet al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 101, 083601 (2008).