The Tale of Three Cities: Strategies for Improving 
1 
Accessibility and Reusability of Heritage Data 
2 
3  Alphaeus Lien-Talks, University of York, Historic England and Archaeology Data Service (ORCiD: 
4  https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7384-208X)  
Abstract 
5 
Background 
6 
7  Heritage data management plays a vital role in understanding the past and shaping heritage 
8  regeneration strategies. This paper examines the management, impact, and legacy of heritage 
9  information gathered within the High Streets Heritage Action Zone (HSHAZ) programme, 
10  focusing on case studies from Northallerton, Kirkham, and Chester. The research explores three 
11  key areas: planning processes, community wellbeing initiatives, and heritage research projects. 
Methods 
12 
13  Through a mixed-methods approach, combining semi-structured interviews, questionnaires, 
14  and data audits, this study investigates the use of existing and newly created heritage datasets, 
15  methods of data sharing, and the long-term preservation of heritage information. The research 
16  reveals variation in data management practices across different HSHAZ projects and identifies 
17  challenges in ensuring the accessibility and reusability of heritage data. 
Results 
18 
19  Key findings highlight the widespread reuse of data across all strands of the HSHAZ, the low 
20  awareness and utilisation of Data Management Plans (DMPs), and the diverse approaches to 
21  sharing and preserving heritage information. The study also uncovers a tendency to prioritise 
22  ease of use, such as the PDF format, over accessibility and reusability of raw data. 
Discussion 
23 
24  The paper advocates for the early integration of data management strategies in heritage 
25  regeneration projects, the adoption of open data practices, greater community involvement in 
26  heritage data collection and sharing, and the development of cross-institutional collaborations. 

27  It also stresses the importance of long-term digital preservation strategies to ensure the 
28  longevity and accessibility of heritage information. 
29  Recommendations include developing standardised data management guidelines for heritage 
30  projects, creating of project archives, implementing training programmes on data management 
31  best practices, establishing community heritage hubs, and fostering partnerships between 
32  heritage projects and data repositories. 
33  This research contributes to the ongoing discourse on heritage data management, offering 
34  insights that can inform future urban regeneration initiatives and enhance the long-term value 
35  and impact of heritage information. 
36  Keywords: Data Management, Heritage Regeneration, Planning Process, Community Wellbeing, 
37  Heritage Research    

Introduction 
38 
39  Heritage data is critical for understanding the past and forecasting future trends, particularly in 
40  the context of the High Street. The traditional High Street has recently faced significant 
41  challenges (Carmona 2015), with the decline accelerated by factors such as online shopping, 
42  economic pressures, and the COVID-19 pandemic (nef 2010). To mitigate the impacts of the 
43  decline, The United Kingdom government created a range of initiatives to help increase footfall 
44  and visitors to the high street, by ensuring that it caters to wider social needs: providing places 
45  to meet, live and work - to spend time and not just money (Turley 2019; Lloyd-James et al. 2020).  
The High Streets HAZ 
46 
47  The High Streets Heritage Action Zone (HSHAZ) programme, funded by £95 million from the UK 
48  government and led by Historic England, aimed to revitalise 67 high streets across England 
49  (Historic England 2019). By combining investment in buildings and shopfronts with community 
50  engagement and cultural events, the initiative aimed to foster a sense of pride, strengthened 
51  community ties, and promoted economic growth (ibid). Local authorities, in partnership with 
52  Historic England, restored dilapidated buildings, transforming them into homes, shops, and 
53  community spaces, while enhancing the local historic character (Fylde Borough Council 2019; 
54  Hambleton District Council 2019; Cheshire West and Chester Council 2019). This initiative also 
55  encouraged communities to reconnect with their local high streets through a range of cultural 
56  activities, further solidifying the High Street’s importance as a central space for social and 
57  economic interaction (Historic England 2024a).  
58  The results of this impressive initiative are yet to be released, and as such, cannot be explored 
59  in this paper. One aspect which has yet to be explored is the role of data within these heritage 
60  regeneration projects, which is the focus of this paper.  
The three cities 
61 
62  The HSHAZ programme included a variety of case studies which demonstrated different 
63  approaches to revitalising High Street character. For this paper, focus will be given to 
64  Northallerton, Kirkham and Chester (Fig 1).  

65   
66  Fig *, a map of the HSHAZ locations, with emphasis on the three case studies (authors own).  
67  In Northallerton, North Yorkshire, the focus was heritage dissemination and research through 
68  community engagement through an innovative Augmented Reality Heritage Trail and a new 
69  Heritage Hub, in order to engage the community and celebrate local history (Hambleton District 
70  Council 2019). Northallerton also included projects on shopfront improvements and 
71  repurposing underutilised spaces in historic buildings into affordable housing, places to work 
72  and cultural spaces (ibid).  
73  Kirkham, Lancashire, with its rich Roman, WWII, and railway heritage, centred its project on a 
74  Heritage, Health and Wellbeing Programme, bringing archival material into the hands of the 
75  local community to create spaces in which to explore Kirkham’s heritage (Fylde Borough 
76  Council 2019). Kirkham’s HSHAZ also had projects to improve the built environment, market 
77  square and the conservation of its heritage assets, as well as a Cultural Consortium to foster 
78  community involvement (ibid).  
79  Chester, Cheshire West and Chester, a city known for its Roman walls, amphitheatre, and 
80  iconic Rows, was bidding for UNESCO World Heritage status (Cheshire West and Chester 
81  Council 2019). The focus of this HSHAZ was the "Revive and Renew" initiative, aiming to restore 
82  the historic character of the Rows, and leveraging the NPPF to tackle the challenges of empty 
83  shops and antisocial behaviour (ibid). The other initiatives, Rows Engagement and Rows 
84  Rebranded programmes, focused on embracing and sharing the heritage of the local 
85  shopkeepers and community (Cheshire West and Chester Council 2019). 
86  To achieve these aims, heritage data was an integral aspect of the initiative, spanning topics of 
87  heritage dissemination, community wellbeing, and the National Planning Policy Framework 

88  (NPPF). However, the increasing diversity of datasets—ranging from point clouds and GIS to 
89  public contributions—create significant challenges in accessibility and interoperability of 
90  heritage datasets (Meyer et al. 2007). This paper argues that data captured through heritage 
91  regeneration projects should become as available to reuse as possible. By making datasets 
92  open to reuse, it will unlock the potential of heritage data, offering new insights into the 
93  revitalisation of the high street.  
Materials and methods 
94 
Aims and objectives 
95 
96  The key aim of the paper is to comprehensively understand the management, impact, and 
97  legacy of heritage information gathered within the HSHAZ, and to provide informed 
98  recommendations for heritage regeneration projects, planning processes, heritage 
99  dissemination, and heritage and wellbeing initiatives. To be able to achieve this research aim, 
100  the following objectives were set.  
101  Investigate the use of new and existing heritage information: 
102  •  Examine the source, file type and emerging trends of data reuse. 
103  •  Examine the current data practices of data creation within heritage regeneration 
104  projects. 
105  Investigate the Archiving and sharing of heritage information: 
106  •  Identify and evaluate the various storage solutions and repositories for keeping heritage 
107  information.  
108  Establish the legacy of new information: 
109  •  Determine the long-term impact and legacy of newly acquired or generated heritage 
110  information, including its contribution to historical records, community engagement, 
111  and future research. 
112  Advise on approaches for projects similar to the High Streets Heritage Action Zone (HAZ): 
113  •  Ideate recommendations and best practices for managing heritage information in 
114  projects similar to the High Streets HAZ, based on insights gained from the investigation 
115  and analysis.  

Methodology 
116 
117  To be able to achieve the aims and objectives, methodologies of semi-structured interviews, 
118  questionnaires and data audits were used.  
119  Semi-Structured Interviews 
120  Semi-structured interviews were conducted throughout the HSHAZ from 2021-2024 to gather 
121  in-depth, qualitative insights from stakeholders involved in the programme. Participants 
122  included Historic England employees (HAZ Project Officers), local council members (HAZ 
123  Project Leads, Built Environment Officers), heritage professionals (architects and HAZ tenders), 
124  and community groups. Most interviews were conducted in person on a one-to-one basis, 
125  though due to travel constraints, the majority of Chester’s interviews and those with HAZ Project 
126  Officers were carried out via Microsoft Teams or Zoom. 
127  Semi-structured interviews were selected as they allowed pre-determined questions to guide 
128  the conversation while enabling flexibility for open discussions (Cridland et al., 2015; Whiting, 
129  2008). This approach ensured the research questions were addressed but also facilitated 
130  incidental discoveries from multiple viewpoints regarding data management. The interview 
131  guide is detailed in Appendix 1. 
132  Following Denzin and Lincoln (2011) and Kallio et al. (2016), several steps were undertaken: 
133  1.  Self-Reflection: The researcher reflected on biases, experiences, and values to 
134  understand how these may influence outcomes (Cleary et al., 2014; Salmon, 2013). 
135  2.  Theoretical Framework: A constructivist-interpretive approach was adopted to focus on 
136  participants' perspectives. 
137  3.  Designing the Interview Guide: Open-ended questions explored heritage project 
138  effectiveness, challenges, and community engagement. 
139  4.  Pilot Testing: A pilot test refined questions for clarity. 
140  5.  Conducting Interviews: Interviews were recorded using an iPhone and stored on Google 
141  Drive, then transcribed with Descript. The data were grouped by case study and project. 
142  6.  Data Analysis: Systematic coding identified themes and patterns within the qualitative 
143  data using inductive reasoning to extract significant insights related to HSHAZ. 
144  This approach allowed detailed, reflective responses, enriching the understanding of heritage 
145  project effectiveness and community engagement. 

146  Questionnaire Design and Analysis 
147  Questionnaire responses were collected throughout the HSHAZ from 2021-2024. The 
148  questionnaires were used to gather general trends from stakeholders involved in the HSHAZ. 
149  The respondents of the questionnaires were data users/creators of the HSHAZ, including 
150  Historic England employees (HAZ Project Officers), local council members (HAZ Project Leads) 
151  and heritage professionals (architects and HAZ tenders). The questionnaires were tailored to 
152  the intended participants, with six separate questionnaires (one each for the HAZ Project 
153  Officers, HAZ Project Leads, architects in each of the case studies and the cultural programme 
154  of Northallerton). The questionnaire was built on Qualtrics, using a University of York license, 
155  and was disseminated using Yet Another Mail Merge extension to Google Sheets to enable the 
156  emails to be personalised to the receiver. The results were then cleaned using Excel to remove 
157  additional fields and personal data and filtered to those that completed greater than 40% of the 
158  survey, yielding 29 results.  
159  The questionnaire surveys were conducted as they allowed general trends of the data 
160  management and interaction to be seen from multiple stakeholders (Finstad, 2010). The 
161  questions were designed to capture predominantly quantitative data as it allows trends to be 
162  evaluated using statistics, giving precise answers to complex research questions (Gay et al. 
163  2009). The majority of the questions used a 7-Point Likert scale as they allowed the respondent 
164  to capture nuanced opinions and perceptions, whilst not providing too many options that trends 
165  were masked (Finstad, 2010; Dawes, 2008). Qualitative questions were also included to 
166  elucidate why specific values may have been given to the Likert scale questions to allow 
167  experiences and conceptual elements to support the numeric values (Mertler, 2016; Fraenkel et 
168  al., 2012; Creswell, 2005). The questionnaire of the Project Leads is in Appendix 2, with the 
169  results in Appendix 3.  
170  Data Audits 
171  Data audits were conducted towards the end of the HSHAZ, between August 2023- September 
172  2024. The data audits were carried out on the  Planning Portals of Northallerton, Kirkham and 
173  Chester, as well as on the shared project Google Drive of Northallerton’s cultural programme. By 
174  investigating these collections’ materials, it was possible to ascertain which materials were 
175  shared and deposited, and if so, in what data type (e.g., photographs, 3D models), and file 
176  format (e.g., PDF, JPEG, DOCX), and where and how they were shared or deposited. The results 
177  are in Appendix 4 and 5.  
178  Steps: 

179  Data Selection: A representative subset of datasets from each case study (Northallerton, 
180  Kirkham, Chester) was identified to ensure comprehensive analysis. These were all applications 
181  made during 01 January 2020 to 31 March 2024, and from the “High Street” (High Street for 
182  Northallerton, conservation zone for Kirkham and the Rows for Chester). 
183  Data Evaluation: Datasets were compared against established guidelines to assess their 
184  quality and accessibility. This included evaluating the completeness, accuracy, and usability of 
185  the data. 
186  Gap Analysis: Discrepancies and gaps between current data practices and best practices were 
187  identified. This analysis was used to propose recommendations for improving data accessibility 
188  and interoperability. 
Results 
189 
190  The tables in Appendix 3 and 4 summarises the datasets identified from various High Streets 
191  Heritage Action Zone (HSHAZ) locations, categorising the data by its source, format, and 
192  method of sharing, including both reused and newly created materials. The analysis of this data 
193  reveals key trends in the handling and dissemination of heritage information within each of the 
194  three projects (planning, wellbeing and research). 
Reused Datasets 
195 
196  In terms of the planning process, several datasets are related to requirements of the National 
197  Planning Policy Framework (Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government 2023). 
198  These include historic maps (to create map regressions), previous applications (to illustrate 
199  accumulative impact of previous developments) and historic photographs and entries in the 
200  National List for England records (to help identify heritage significance).  
201  Within the wellbeing strand, archival material of historic photographs was used to provide 
202  hands-on activities to boost community health. Much of this material was sourced from local 
203  archives and these physical copies allowed tactile interaction with the past. The participants 
204  supplied further material themselves, providing an opportunity to talk about their memories, 
205  further increasing their wellbeing.  
206  The heritage research strand in Northallerton also reused datasets, and included materials from 
207  local archives, community groups and the local population. Further information was sourced 
208  from the North Yorkshire County Records Office, including archival materials such as historic 
209  maps and a sanitation document. To include locally sourced information within the heritage 

210  research project, community research groups provided valuable datasets in the form of reports. 
211  Further grassroot information, as found in the wellbeing strand, were sourced from personal 
212  archives of photographs and ephemera (e.g., reciepts, books and physical items (Fig 2)). These 
213  personal items were brought to the Heritage Hub to be digitised and/or housed within the 
214  Heritage Hub.  
215   
216  Figure 1, 19th century bills relating to George Inn given by Suzie Valentine, who runs a local business. 
217  Overall, the data reuse used a two-fold strategy: leveraging readily available resources and 
218  integrating community-driven datasets.  
Created Datasets 
219 
220  The planning process also produced a range of documents that are classed as meeting NPPF 
221  requirements including plans, elevations and photographs (to show proposed and existing 
222  fabric in order to enable informed decisions), maps (to indicate the proposed site), heritage 
223  statements (to show the significance and implications of proposed works) and instances of 
224  archaeological reports (where archaeological investigations are required). Supplementing the 
225  NPPF documents were 3D models (used to help showcase proposed works (Fig 2), and 
226  condition surveys aided by drone photography (to help conserve the unique Rows).  

227   
228  Figure 2, a 3D model made for applicationaplication 21-04050-LBC (Potts 2021). 
229  Within the wellbeing strand, Helen Shearn and Sue Flowers worked co-creatively and 
230  collaboratively with the local community to produce a range of outputs from wellbeing 
231  workshops (such as a physical map (Fig 3) and scrapbook of their collated research and 
232  artworks inspired by the local heritage) and Oral Histories (in MP3 format) capturing individual’s 
233  stories and memories (Fig 4).  

234     
235  Figure 3 and 4, the map created by the community (authors own), and  a leaflet about the Voices project (Kirkham 
236  Futures n.d.). 
237  The heritage research strand also generated new datasets, including detailed oral histories (in 
238  WAV format) alongside testimonies and 3D models and soundscapes which were included in an 
239  Augmented Reality Heritage Trail. Community research was also included as part of the project, 
240  allowing individuals to research elements of history that interested them. 
Method of Sharing and Longevity 
241 
242  For the built heritage strand, Planning Portals and public consultations provided the best 
243  opportunities for sharing the information with the public and external stakeholders. These 
244  methods of sharing have varied longevities with Planning Portals being indefinite, and public 
245  consultations being momentary (Fig 5). The majority of the data uploaded to the Planning Portal 
246  was in the format of PDFs and included thumbnails of images within the heritage statement of 
247  modern and historic maps, photography and 3D models. Subsidiary to the heritage statements 
248  were PDFs of plans and elevations. For internal stakeholders, company servers will host the 
249  information for a period of seven years.  

250   
251  Figure 5, public consultation with Paul Hogarth company engaged in the Public Realm strand on proposed alterations 
252  to Market Square (FBC 2021). 
253  For the wellbeing aspect, most methods of sharing were through individual events and heritage 
254  days. These methods of data sharing do not provide a longevity. Websites were created to share 
255  information with the public and contained collated material from the wellbeing programme. The 
256  website had an intermediate longevity, depending on maintenance and funding.   
257  Facebook groups were used by the wellbeing and heritage research projects and were also 
258  instrumental in providing a platform for the sharing of community heritage, giving opportunities 
259  for individuals to share their stories, research and interests. Facebook is not an archive, and as 
260  such is reliant on the company META remaining operational and that their company policies 
261  allow for the continued storage of community posted comments. 
262  The heritage research initiative shared its datasets in a variety of different ways. The first method 
263  was by the creation of a Heritage Hub, a community centre in which interactive tablets, 
264  artefacts and paper copies of documents were accessible. The Heritage Hub required and still 
265  requires council backing and financial support to remain open. Furthermore, the creation of a 
266  Web Application Augmented Reality (AR) provided an interactive method for sharing the heritage 
267  research. Using a web application instead of a native Augmented Reality platform offered 
268  greater legacy; however, this requires maintenance and funding. Likewise, a website was 
269  created which housed the Oral Histories and digitised community material. These materials 
270  were also deposited in the Local County Records Office, offering a greater legacy. 

General data practices 
271 
272  Alongside investigating the individual practices of the stakeholders, it was important to 
273  investigate the overall data management within the HSHAZ.  
274  One aspect of data management strategy was the creation of Data Management Plans (DMPs). 
275  From the responses gathered by the questionnaire (see Appendix 2), it was shown that over 50% 
276  of respondents did not know what a DMP was, and when the participant knew of a DMP, 22.2˙% 
277  used DMPs within the HSHAZ (Table 1). Furthermore, most of the respondents did not archive 
278  their data (80%) (Table 2). When data was deposited, the respondents used the file formats of 
279  PDF and DOCX, both of which are predominantly text file formats, supplemented by more 
280  specialised file formats such as JPEG, Audio files and paper copies (Table 3).  
Did you use a DMP in the HSHAZ? 
 
  No  Yes 
f
o
 
 
d
Maybe  3 
r
a  
?  
e
P
h M No  14 
 
u D  
o
y   a Yes  9  2 
 
e
v
a Total  26  2 
H
281   
282  Table 1, the number of stakeholders who knew of Data Management Plans and stakeholders that used Data 
283  Management Plans as part of the HSHAZ.  
Did you deposit your data? 
Yes  5 
No  20 
284  Table 2, the number of individual HSHAZ locations which deposited their data. 
Created file formats  Archived file formats 
 
PDF  29  3 
Word document (.doc/.docx)  27  3 
JPEG  25  2 
Excel (.xlsx)  22 
 
Spreadsheet  16 
 
Paper  15  2 
PNG  9  2 
Audio file (.mp3)  8  2 

Audio file (.wav)  3  2 
TIFF  2 
 
Other  2  2 
285   
286  Figure 3, file formats that were created and archived. 
287  When asked if there was the potential for losing valuable datasets over half (51%) of the 
288  respondents stated that they agreed (4% strongly, 17% agree, and 30% somewhat agree) and 
289  only 4% disagreed (strongly) (Table 4). When asked the potential causes for data loss the largest 
290  contributing factors were identified as no requirement to publish (20%) or archive (19%) data, 
291  and thus data was not archived (19%) (Table 5). 
To what extent do you agree that valuable datasets are being lost? 
Strongly agree  1 
Agree  5 
Somewhat agree  8 
Neither agree nor disagree  10 
Strongly disagree  1 
292  Table 4, to what extent stakeholders thought data was being lost.    

Reasons for Data Loss  
There is no requirement to publish data  14 
There is no requirement to archive data  13 
There is no requirement to make data publicly accessible  11 
Data is not archived  11 
Data is not published  7 
Data is not made publicly accessible  6 
Other  3 
293  Table 5, the causes for this loss.  
Discussion 
294 
295  The clearest result from the research was that data management was not a component of the 
296  High Streets HAZ, leading to a range of implications for data legacy. The number of stakeholders 
297  using DMPs was alarmingly low, yet, given the evidence that it was not a requirement of the 
298  HSHAZ, alongside the lack of awareness of these data management tools (see Table 2), this 
299  finding was not surprising. Nonetheless, data was an integral part of HSHAZ, and, as such, the 
300  current data practices need to be investigated.  
Use of new and existing heritage information  
301 
302  The stakeholders of the built heritage initiative used datasets to meet planning regulations, as 
303  well as to aid their conservation efforts. The prevalence of data reuse was high within the 
304  HSHAZ, yet the range and amount of material used by these projects was limited. Given the 
305  heritage significance of the Rows, and the quantity of large-scale research projects centring on 
306  this heritage asset (e.g., Brown 1999 and Clarke 2011), it would have been expected that more 
307  existing information was used. Upon further investigation, it was apparent that the datasets 
308  used were from easily accessible sources (e.g., Heritage Gateway or Search Engine Results (Fig 
309  6 and 7)).  

310     
311  Fig 6 and 7, historical photograph in applications 23/02160/LBC (top above) (Cragg 2023), and retrived using Google 
312  for this paper (above) (authors own).  
313  The prevalence of the use of these easily obtainable resources indicated three key lessons for 
314  the management of heritage datasets: firstly, datasets which are easily accessible are routinely 
315  reused; secondly, those resources which are less accessible are not used; and thirdly, the need 
316  to make these material as open to reuse as possible. Nonetheless, when investigating the 
317  current practices of the newly created datasets within the HSHAZ, it becomes clear that data is 
318  not currently being made fully open to reuse, further limiting future research projects. The 
319  prevalent use of PDF formats alongside the lack of deposition of raw datasets limits the reuse 
320  potentials. As such, future planning applications or heritage research projects cannot easily 
321  reuse the extensive quantities of newly created datasets. There are several reasons as to why 
322  PDF format is highly prevalent: its unalterable contents ensuring parties agree on the same 
323  version of documents, and the capacity to protect the Intellectual Property of the commercial 
324  companies (Daniel Nickson, pers. comms. 28 February 2024). Nonetheless, given the fact that 
325  the HSHAZ used substantial government funds, it should be recommended that datasets are 
326  made readily available for public good (Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government, 
327  2023). 
328  Within the wellbeing strand, it became clear that the hands-on interactivity with the physical 
329  archival material brought opportunities to increase public awareness and pride in the local 
330  heritage. The use of locally available materials (either from local archives or from the 
331  participants themselves) ensured that the community was able to use resources freely 
332  available to them, increasing the chance of further interactions with the materials in the future. 
333  As such, these findings support current initiatives of Historic England and UK government to 
334  democratise heritage research (e.g., through Missing Pieces Project (Historic England 2024b) 
335  and increasing support for Historic Environment Records (Historic England 2024c)) and 

336  illustrates the potential community interest and value in making datasets freely accessible. The 
337  recording of Oral Histories and creation of heritage outputs provides a grassroots heritage 
338  opportunity, not only furthering the wellbeing of the community but also the sense of place, 
339  inclusivity and pride, and as such community collaborations are recommended for future 
340  research projects.  
341  The Heritage Research initiative also used and created datasets to reach their objectives. Within 
342  this strand, community knowledge and archives were captured through Oral Histories and the 
343  digitising of their collections. Within Northallerton’s HSHAZ, Virginia Arrowsmith’s knowledge of 
344  archival and Oral History practices ensured that these materials were captured, managed and 
345  then deposited following best practices. Further datasets were used by tenders of the AR 
346  Heritage Trail to ensure that the 3D models and soundscapes were representative of the local 
347  historic character, and included local archival materials of a sanitation document and local 
348  history research papers. It was clear that throughout the Heritage Research strand, local 
349  knowledge was pivotal to meet project aims. As such, it would be recommended that local 
350  community archives are made as accessible for future research projects as possible.   
Sharing and legacy of heritage information 
351 
352  Within the built heritage context, the majority of datasets were uploaded to the Planning Portal. 
353  The routine storage of information within a council repository is likely to ensure that these 
354  datasets are available indefinitely. Nonetheless, storing data within the  Planning Portals also 
355  increases siloing of information as each council maintains their own repository (e.g., Chester: 
356  https://pa.cheshirewestandchester.gov.uk/online-applications/, Northallerton: 
357  https://planning.hambleton.gov.uk/online-applications/ and Kirkham: https://pa.fylde.gov.uk/). 
358  As such, datasets are preserved yet, without interlinking these datasets, there is a chance this 
359  practice will lead to the fragmentation, and thus loss, of wider initiative datasets. Another 
360  intriguing difference indicated by the built heritage strand of the HSHAZ was the difference 
361  between above and below ground archaeology. Archaeological investigations below ground 
362  consist of a standard workflow of logging excavations on OASIS and the uploading of field work 
363  reports and datasets to the Archaeology Data Service Library. Conversely, above ground 
364  archaeology does not follow this workflow, despite encouragement to do so. As such, the below 
365  ground archaeology is more systematically preserved. In turn, this preservation system raises 
366  questions about the differences in interpretations of loss of unrepeatable datasets between the 
367  retrofitting and removal of standing building fabric from an unlisted historic building and the 
368  excavations below ground. 

369  Within the wellbeing context, heritage information sharing is ephemeral. The wellbeing 
370  programme incorporated events and workshops to engage the local community with the local 
371  heritage, and these events had the benefit of reaching a wide audience in short momentary 
372  activities. 
373  The heritage research strand used a multipronged approach to sharing and archiving heritage 
374  information. The first approach was the creation of an AR Heritage Trail (Fig 8). This interactive 
375  method of dissemination has the potential to reach broad audiences and immerse viewers in 
376  the heritage whilst still being in the high street. As such, it used the full potential of AR to create 
377  activities, bringing tourists to the town. One negative aspect of the AR, was the need to maintain 
378  the platform. In the case of Northallerton, this platform was a Web Application and, as such, 
379  requires less intervention and updating; nonetheless, the continued promotion and 
380  maintenance of the platform requires active participation from skilled individuals. It is expected 
381  that post the HSHAZ, the platform will no longer be accessible. Websites were also created 
382  within the heritage research strand, enabling further heritage dissemination to non-locals or 
383  those unable to access the city centre. As with the AR Heritage Trail, this requires maintenance 
384  and funding to keep live. In this case the website had domain registry for 5 years from 2020, and 
385  as such, is unlikely to be no longer be accessible post HSHAZ. Further approaches of heritage 
386  dissemination included the creation of a Heritage Hub. Here, members of the community could 
387  share their heritage within a designated space. The space was valuable to more isolated 
388  members of the community and met an essential need whilst providing heritage information 
389  (Arrowsmith, pers. comms. 20 January 2023). Nonetheless, the Heritage Hub requires funding 
390  to remain open, which in turn requires persistent support from the local council. The tenure of 
391  the building will be reviewed on a 2-year basis post HSHAZ, and, as such, has an uncertain 
392  future. Within the Heritage Hub, Oral Histories were captured, alongside the digitisation of 
393  community members’ personal archives, allowing individuals to explore their own intangible 
394  heritage. These were recorded and archived within the North Yorkshire County Records Office 
395  thus preserving unrepeatable datasets.  

396   
397  Figure 8, the AR heritage trail advertising (Northallerton Heritage Hub n.d.) 
398  There is a partial legacy of the data generated from the HSHAZ; nonetheless, there is a definite 
399  need to consider heritage data management in future heritage regeneration projects.  
Future strategies  
400 
401  To ensure effective management of heritage information in projects similar to the High Streets 
402  Heritage Action Zone (HSHAZ), it is important to adopt best practices to address the challenges 
403  and opportunities identified through this paper. These recommendations provide a structured 
404  approach to standardisation, sustainability, community engagement, innovative heritage 
405  interpretation, collaboration, longevity, funding, and evaluation. 
406  One of the most significant ways in which heritage management could become more 
407  systematic in heritage regeneration programs would be the introduction of heritage information 
408  management from a project’s conceptualisation. If the precedent for data management is set 
409  early, sufficient funding, support, training, retention policies and requirements could be met (for 
410  example, sustainable digital infrastructure could be established). Heritage data must be stored 
411  on secure, long-term platforms that ensure preservation. By developing a centralised project 
412  digital archive, projects could maintain a single source of truth for all data, with cloud-based 
413  backups ensuring additional security. This project archive could then be archived within a Core 
414  Trust Seal repository such as the Archaeology Data Service, ensuring longevity of this material.  

415  A key area for improvement in heritage management is the encouragement to deposit raw data 
416  in open formats and structures. To enhance consistency and ensure future accessibility, 
417  projects should adopt widely accepted formats for heritage data, such as PDF/A for documents, 
418  alongside providing the raw datasets. As such, this would open new possibilities for reuse. 
419  Further research is needed to investigate the extent to which valuable data is only being stored 
420  within the Planning Portal; however, the results from this study indicate these trends to be 
421  prevalent in HSHAZ datasets within Kirkham, Northallerton and Chester. Thus, stakeholders are 
422  able to grant planning permissions by being as informed as possible, streamlining the process, 
423  and saving time, money and effort.  
424  Engaging local communities in heritage projects brings immense value. To facilitate 
425  participation, projects should encourage community contributions while ensuring that the 
426  materials the community provide meets digital preservation standards. Local heritage hubs 
427  could serve as collection points for physical artefacts and oral histories. Clear guidelines and 
428  training needs to be offered to communities to help them digitise and contribute their data; this 
429  community driven approach was shown to be successful in Northallerton. Community 
430  involvement enhances the richness of heritage documentation and fosters a sense of 
431  ownership. A feedback loop could be established, ensuring that community members can 
432  engage with the datasets they contribute, thus promoting further participation and enrichment 
433  of heritage materials. 
434  Collaboration across institutions is essential for the success of heritage projects. Cross-
435  disciplinary teams comprising experts from archaeology, architecture, history, and digital 
436  humanities should be established to ensure a holistic approach to heritage management. 
437  Partnerships with national institutions, like Historic England and local authorities, can 
438  strengthen data integration efforts and promote resource sharing. Cross-institutional 
439  collaboration allows projects to tap into a wealth of expertise, ensuring that both tangible and 
440  intangible heritage datasets are valued and preserved. Sharing methodologies between similar 
441  projects can also foster the development of best practices across different case studies, 
442  allowing for continuous improvement. 
443  Ensuring the longevity and accessibility of heritage information is crucial for future generations. 
444  Heritage projects should invest in long-term digital preservation strategies, ensuring datasets 
445  are stored in secure, reputable repositories. Regular audits and compliance with international 
446  archival standards can help ensure that data remains relevant and accessible. Wherever 
447  possible, open-access policies should be adopted, enabling the public, researchers, and 

448  policymakers to freely engage with the datasets. Creating a user-friendly public interface for 
449  heritage information, complete with visualisation tools and search functionality, can further 
450  enhance public engagement. 
451  By focusing on these core areas— early intervention, sustainability, community involvement, 
452  collaboration and longevity—projects similar to the High Streets HAZ can ensure that heritage 
453  data is managed effectively, preserved over the long term, made accessible to the public, and 
454  reusable for local councils and heritage researchers alike. These approaches not only help to 
455  safeguard the heritage of local communities but also create lasting value for the broader 
456  heritage sector. 
Conclusion 
457 
458  This study provides key insights into managing heritage information within the High Streets 
459  Heritage Action Zone (HSHAZ) programme. It highlights both the potential and challenges of 
460  heritage data reuse across built heritage, wellbeing, and research strands, emphasising the 
461  need for better Data Management Plans (DMPs). Current practices often prioritise ease of use 
462  over long-term accessibility. The study recommends early integration of data management, 
463  open data practices, community involvement, and cross-institutional collaboration. Long-term 
464  preservation strategies and secure digital archives are essential for ensuring the longevity of 
465  heritage data. Improved practices will maximise the legacy of heritage information in urban 
466  regeneration.   

Acknowledgements 
467 
468  The researcher would like to thank the participants within the research, alongside the Arts and 
469  Humanities Research Council’s Collaborative Doctoral Partnership for facilitating this doctoral 
470  research and attendance of CAA2024, Historic England for being the Partner Organisation and 
471  University of York. The researcher would also like to thank their supervisors Kate Giles, Kieron 
472  Niven, Simon Taylor and David Andrews. 
Funding Information 
473 
474  Research for this paper was presented at the Computer Applications in Archaeology 
475  International 2024 conference. Attendance was made possible through the support of the Arts 
476  and Humanities Research Council’s Collaborative Doctoral Partnership Scheme (grant number 
477  AH/W002469/1).  
Conflict of interest disclosure 
478 
479  The author of this paper declares no conflict of interest related to the content presented in this 
480  research. The study, data analysis, and conclusions have been conducted independently and 
481  without any financial, personal, or professional affiliations that could potentially influence the 
482  objectivity or integrity of the information provided. There are no associations or financial 
483  arrangements with any organisations or individuals that could be perceived as having a vested 
484  interest in the outcomes or findings of this article. 
485  In the event of any potential conflicts of interest arising in the future, the author will promptly 
486  disclose them and take appropriate actions to ensure transparency and maintain the highest 
487  level of integrity in the research process. The author is committed to upholding ethical practices 
488  in scientific inquiry and reporting to maintain the credibility and credibility of the research 
489  findings. 
Data and supplementary information availability 
490 
491  The data and supplementary information for this paper is accessible at Zenodo at: 
492  https://zenodo.org/records/13850567?preview=1&token=eyJhbGciOiJIUzUxMiJ9.eyJpZCI6IjkxNT
493  hjMjczLTc3OWYtNDUzYS04ZGFkLWRkMWY3MDcwZGQ5ZCIsImRhdGEiOnt9LCJyYW5kb20iOiI2
494  ODliMWNjYWU2ZDY4ZjYxMTQwMTIxMTJhMmMxYjg4ZCJ9.foV5tAfqw0T58BUKhxlOYOqi_AnHy-
495  Z5Gxv7rucgZ_hJ5K7YIVqIcS-YE-Q8YdYTVsOD5NaqoWAeWZX2UmHdSg    

References 
496 
497  Brown, A. (1999). Rows of Chester: The Chester Rows Research Project. Available at: 
498  https://archaeologydataservice.ac.uk/library/browse/issue.xhtml?recordId=1085266
499  &recordType=MonographSeries [accessed 20/05/2024]. 
500  Carmona, M. (2015). London's local high streets: The problems, potential and complexities 
501  of mixed street corridors. Progress in Planning, 100, 1-84. 
502  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.progress.2014.03.001 [accessed 26 May 2021]. 
503  Cheshire West and Chester Council (2019). Chester High Street Regeneration Project. 
504  Clarke, C. A. M. (2011). Introduction: Medieval Chester: Views from the Walls. In Clarke, 
505  C.R.M (Ed.), Mapping the Medieval City: Space, Place and Identity in Chester c.1200-
506  1600 (pp. 1-18). Cardiff: University of Wales Press. 
507  Cleary, M., Horsfall, J., & Hayter, M. (2014). Data collection and sampling in qualitative 
508  research: Does size matter?. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 473-475. 
509  https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.12163 
510  Cragg, S. (2023). Change of Use and Refurbishment to Accommodate Office Space, 
511  Residential Space (3 Apartments), and Flexible Commercial Space. Planning 
512  application No. 23/02160/LBC. Chester and Cheshire West Council Planning. 
513  [Accessed January 18, 2024]. 
514  Creswell, J. W. (2005). Educational Research: Planning, Conducting, and Evaluating 
515  Quantitative and Qualitative Research. Upper Saddle River: Pearson Education, Inc. 
516  Cridland, E. K., Jones, S. C., Caputi, P., & Magee, C. A. (2015). Qualitative research with 
517  families living with autism spectrum disorder: Recommendations for conducting semi-
518  structured interviews. Journal of Intellectual and Developmental Disability, 40(1), 78-
519  91. https://doi.org/10.3109/13668250.2014.964191 
520  Dawes, J. (2008). Do data characteristics change according to the number of scale points 
521  used? An experiment using 5-point, 7-point, and 10-point scales. International Journal 
522  of Market Research, 50(1), 61-104. https://doi.org/10.1177/147078530805000106 

523  Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (Eds.). (2011). The Sage Handbook of Qualitative Research. 
524  Sage. 
525  FBC (2021). "Public Consultation Period Extended on Kirkham’s Public Realm Proposals." 
526  [Online] Available at: https://new.fylde.gov.uk/public-consultation-period-extended-
527  on-kirkhams-public-realm-proposals/ [accessed 02/06/2023]. 
528  Finstad, K. (2010). Response interpolation and scale sensitivity: Evidence against 5-point 
529  scales. Journal of Usability Studies, 5(3), 104-110. 
530  Fraenkel, J. R., Wallen, N. E., & Hyun, H. H. (2012). How to Design and Evaluate Research in 
531  Education (8th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. 
532  Fylde Borough Council (2019). Programme Design Document: Kirkham HSHAZ. 
533  Gay, L. R., Mills, G. E., & Airasian, P. (2009). Educational Research: Competencies for 
534  Analysis and Applications. New Jersey: Pearson Education Inc. 
535  Hambleton District Council (2019). Northallerton High Street Regeneration Project. 
536  Historic England (2019). High Streets Heritage Action Zones [Online]. Available at: 
537  https://historicengland.org.uk/advice/heritage-action-zones/regenerating-historic-
538  high-streets/ [accessed 25/08/2024]. 
539  Historic England (2024a). High Streets Heritage Action Zones Cultural Programme [Online]. 
540  Available at: https://historicengland.org.uk/advice/heritage-action-
541  zones/regenerating-historic-high-streets/ [accessed 25/08/2024]. 
542  Historic England (2024b). Missing Pieces Project: Add Your Pieces to the Big Picture [Online]. 
543  Available at: https://historicengland.org.uk/listing/missing-pieces/ [accessed 
544  25/08/2024]. 
545  Historic England (2024c). "Search the List." [Online] Available at: 
546  https://historicengland.org.uk/listing/the-list/ [accessed 25/08/2024]. 

547  Kallio, H., Pietilä, A. M., Johnson, M., & Kangasniemi, M. (2016). Systematic methodological 
548  review: Developing a framework for a qualitative semi-structured interview guide. 
549  Journal of Advanced Nursing, 72(12), 2954-2965. https://doi.org/10.1111/jan.13031 
550  Kirkham Futures (n.d.). "Voices From Kirkham & Wesham - Oral Histories and Stories." 
551  [Online] Available at: https://www.kirkhamfutures.org/post/voices-from-kirkham-
552  wesham-oral-histories-and-stories [accessed 09/06/2023]. 
553  Lloyd-James, O., Lane, R., & Henderson, A. (2020). Researching High Street Heritage Action 
554  Zones. Historic England Research Issue 14. 
555  Lloyd-James, O., Lane, R., & Henderson, A. (2020). Researching High Street Heritage 
556  Action Zones. Historic England [Online]. Last updated: 19 February 2020. Available 
557  at: https://historicengland.org.uk/whats-new/research/back-issues/researching-high-
558  street-heritage-action-zones/ [accessed 20 May 2021]. 
559  Mertler, C. A. (2016). Action Research: Improving Schools and Empowering Educators. 
560  Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
561  Ministry of Housing, Communities & Local Government (2023). National Planning Policy 
562  Framework. 
563  nef (2010). Re-imagining the High Street: Escape from Clone Town Britain [Online]. Available 
564  at: https://b.3cdn.net/nefoundation/1da089b4b1e66ba2b3_v8m6b0c0w.pdf [accessed 
565  24 May 2021]. 
566  Northallerton Heritage Hub (n.d.). "Discover Northallerton: Heritage Trail" [Online]. Available 
567  at: https://www.northallertonheritage.uk/discover/discover-northallerton-heritage-
568  trail [accessed 20/09/2024]. 
569  Potts (2021). The Chester Rows: Eastgate Row North, Eastgate Row South, Watergate Row 
570  North, Watergate Row South, Bridge Street Row East, Bridge Street Row West 
571  Chester. [Online] Available at: https://pa.cheshirewestandchester.gov.uk/online-
572  applications/applicationDetails.do?keyVal=R0G0SSTE02A00&activeTab=summary 
573  [accessed 20/05/2024]. 

574  Turley (2019). Making Sense of Mixed-use Town Centres [Online]. Available at: 
575  https://static.turley.co.uk/pdf/file/2019-
576  10/GDS0249%20-%20Making%20Sense%20Document_Web.pdf [accessed 25 May 
577  2021]. 
578  Whiting, L. S. (2008). Semi-structured interviews: Guidance for novice researchers. Nursing 
579  Standard (through 2013), 22(23), 35. 
580  https://doi.org/10.7748/ns2008.02.22.23.35.c6420 