1
Sequence-Based OOK for Orthogonal Multiplexing
of Wake-up Radio Signals and OFDM Waveforms
Alphan S¸ahin, Member, IEEE, and Rui Yang, Member, IEEE
Abstract—In this study, we propose an approach to construct of IEEE 802.11 has started a project to create a specifica-
on-off keying (OOK) symbols for wake-up radios (WURs) by tion amendment [7], named as 802.11ba, for Wi-Fi devices
8102 guA 9  ]PS.ssee[  1v45330.8081:viXra
using sequences in frequency domain. The proposed method
which may be used for IoT applications [8]. 3GPP has also
enables orthogonal multiplexing of wake-up signals (WUSs) and
started a discussion to include protocols that enable WUR
orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) waveforms.
functionalities. WUR should be a simple and low-cost radio
We optimize the sequences with a tractable algorithm relying
on an alternating minimization by considering the reliability without complex signal processing components (e.g., discrete
of WUSs in fading channels. We demonstrate the performance Fourier transform (DFT)) and the corresponding WUS may
of four optimized sequences and compare with state-of-the-
not need to be very sophisticated in some cases. However, the
art approaches. We show that the proposed method improves
design and generation of such a signal are not straightforward
the WUR performance by controlling the energy distribution
when considering the efficiency of the overall network and
in frequency domain while removing the interference-floor at
OFDM receiver. the usage of WUSs in future IoT applications. For example,
using a dedicated resource (frequency or time) for transmitting
WUS is inefficient, and combining it with other signals (e.g.,
I. INTRODUCTION orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) signal)
without interfering with each other is highly desirable. In this
The functionality of the Internet has been expanded in many
paper, we will explore the ideas of multiplexing of WUS with
dimensions in recent years. The inclusion of the Internet of
on-off keying (OOK) symbols and OFDM signals for data
things (IoT) with a large number of connected devices in the
communication with other devices.
communication networks significantly changes the role of the
In the literature, several modulation schemes are proposed
Internet in our daily life and, in many situations, the way we
for WURs. For example, in [1], a special bit stream which
interact with the things around us and the way they interact
generates a WUS with OFDM symbols are proposed by
among them. Combined with other advanced technologies,
considering IEEE 802.11a/g/n packet structure. One of the
such as artificial intelligence and cloud-based communication
proposed bit streams is constructed such that it purposely
networks, IoT enables broad applications such as smart cars,
yields OFDM symbols with high peak-to-average-power ratio
smart home, smart cities, and smart farms. The root building
(PAPR) and the location of the peak sample is controlled in
blocks of those smart things are large number of IoT devices,
time to achieve pulse-position modulation (PPM). Although
e.g., cameras, actuators, and any small and low-cost electronics
the method has its own merit, in practice, OFDM symbols
which may be wired or connected wirelessly.
with high PAPR may not be reliable. The power back-off due
Building the networks with IoT devices faces many chal-
to the high peak sample may limit the coverage range. The
lenges. As most of the IoT devices are the electronics con-
distortion due to non-linear hardware can also cause spectral
nected remotely and powered by batteries, minimizing the
growth which can violate the adjacent-channel interference
power consumption to maintain long battery life over multiple
(ACI) requirements of some standards. Another strategy men-
years is one of the key design criteria. Since many IoT devices
tioned in [1] is to map the low-power constellation points
only need to operate with very long duty cycle, e.g., once a
to the lower half of the channel bandwidth, and high-power
day or several days for smart meters, or only need to operate
points to the upper half to encode a bit 0 (and vice versa
when there is a demand triggered by other rarely happened
for bit 1), i.e., frequency-shift keying (FSK) which is also
events, e.g., severe weather condition, the concept of wake-up
exploited in several WURx designs, e.g., [2]. In [3] and [4], a
radio (WUR) has been introduced for wireless IoT devices.
scheme which modulates the frame length by using multiple
With WUR, an IoT device can be put to sleep when it is
consecutive Wi-Fi or Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) packets
not used. The wake-up radio receiver (WURx) is a specially
is introduced for WURs. The main bottleneck with frame-
designed receiver with extremely low power consumption or
length modulation is that the data rate can be very low as the
without using a battery at all. Such a WURx will wake up the
WUS requires many consecutive packets. In addition, the bit
IoT device once a wake-up signal (WUS) is received.
error rate (BER) performance can degrade drastically as the
The concept of WUR has been introduced in several stan-
continuity of the packets for WUR can be broken if another
dards in the wireless industry. For example, the working group
station accesses the wireless medium. In [5], OOK symbols in
a WUS are generated through by modulating OFDM symbols
Dr. Alphan S¸ahin and Dr. Rui Yang are affiliated with Inter-
via high-power and low-power constellation points for ON and
Digital, Huntington Quadrangle, Melville, NY. email: {alphan.sahin,
rui.yang}@interdigital.com OFF symbols, respectively, for low-data rates. Several other

2
modulation techniques for WURs can also be found in [6] applies element-wise complex conjugation to their arguments,
and the references therein. To the best of our knowledge, the respectively. The operator gives the (k +1)th element of
k
{·}
design of multiple OOK symbols within one OFDM symbol its argument, The 2-norm and infinity norm are denoted by
duration and the orthogonal multiplexing of WUS and OFDM and , respectively. E represents the expectation
2 ∞
k·k k·k {·}
waveforms have not been addressed yet. operator. The field of complex numbers is represented by C.
For IEEE 802.11ba, it has been agreed that the WUS will and return the real part and the imaginary part of
ℜ{·} ℑ{·}
be transmitted by using OOK symbols. The OFDM waveform their arguments, respectively.
parameters adopted in IEEE 802.11n/ac are considered as the
II. SYSTEM MODEL
baseline for the OOK symbol to reuse the existing 802.11n/ac
transmitters. The bandwidth of WUS is decided to be 4 MHz In this section, we provide the models for the wake-up radio
and the OOK symbol duration is set to 2 µs for high-data transmitter (WUTx), multipath channel, and WURx.
rate WUS, which is half of the IEEE 802.11n/ac OFDM
A. Wake-up Radio Transmitter
symbol duration. To enable non-coherent detection, the bits
for the wake-up payload are encoded with Manchester coding, Consider a communication system where the transmitter
which implicitly yields PPM. Several ways of generating generates a WUS by mapping the bits to the basis functions
the OOK symbols are proposed. For example, using the in a basis . In this study, we assume that consists of two
W W
half of the 802.11n/ac OFDM symbols with 13 non-zero basis functions, i.e., = fs (t) i 0,1 ,E fs (t) 2 =
W { i | ∈ { } | i |
subcarriers (i.e., masked-based approach) or using a smaller 1,0 t < T , and fs (t) and fs (t) corre(cid:8)spond to(cid:9)the
s
≤ } 0 1
inverse discrete Fourier transform (IDFT) with 7 non-zero transmitted signals for b = 0 and b = 1, respectively,
m m
subcarriers are some of the proposed methods to generate where b is the mth bit in the WUS. The signal fs (t) is
m
i
s CL×1
the OOK symbols (e.g., see [9] and the references in [10]). constructed by mapping a sequence from frequency
i
∈
Multiplexing quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) and domain using L contiguous orthogonal subcarriers to time
OOK symbols in an orthogonal frequency division multiple domain as
accessing (OFDMA) framework (such as IEEE 802.11ax) has L−1
1
not been addressed in IEEE 802.11ba. One of the reasons fs i(t) = {s }kej2π(k−L+ 21 )∆ft , (1)
i
√P
is because the orthogonality OFDM and OOK symbols with X k=0
the state-of-the-art designs cannot be maintained when their where k is the subcarrier index, ∆f is the subcarrier spacing,
symbol durations are different. s 2 = P, and T = 1/∆f. Without loss of generality,
i s
|| ||
In this study, we propose to construct OOK symbols within we assume that L is an odd positive integer number, the
s
one OFDM symbol for WURs by using a fixed number of element of that corresponds to the DC tone is set to zero
i
s
subcarriers. The proposed approach enables a radio to transmit (i.e., = 0), and P = L 1. The center tone is
i L−1
{ } 2 −
WUSs without any interference to the other subcarriers which not utilized because a DC blocker may be employed at the
may potentially be utilized for the data transmission for the WUR. Assuming a cyclic prefix (CP) is used for the OFDM
other users in the network. We particularly focus on OOK signal, to achieve orthogonal multiplexing of WUS and OFDM
symbols with Manchester coding within an OFDM symbol for waveforms, a CP with the duration of T is prepended to
CP
non-coherent detection. To increase the reliability of WUS, fs (t).
i
we optimize the sequences with a tractable algorithm by To enable non-coherent detection at the WUR, we assume
taking the leakage on the OFF period and the flatness of the that fs (t) confines the symbol energy on the period denoted
i
corresponding waveform in time and frequency domain into by M = (iT ,(i + 1)T ), where T T /2
high,i active active active s
≤
account. The proposed algorithm is based on an algorithm is the active duration for ON and OFF periods. This choice
called cyclic algorithm-new (CAN) which was proposed to implicitly corresponds to PPM or a waveform generated via
generate a unimodular sequence with low integrated side lobe plain OOK waveform when bits are encoded with Manchester
(ISL) metric [11]. A sequence generated with CAN can lead coding. For example, Manchester coding can result in 0, 1
{ }
to significantly low PAPR when it is used in OFDM due to and 1, 0 for b = 0 and b = 1, respectively, and the plain
m m
{ }
the low ISL of the sequence [12]–[14]. Hence, the ideal shape OOK symbol duration is set to T for each coded bit.
active
that CAN targets is a flat signal in time in terms of sample We represent the ideal shape for fs (t) 2 as Λ (t) where
i
| i |
power. We extend CAN to generate any shape in time and Λ (t) = T /T for t M and 0 for t M ,
i s active high,i low,i
∈ ∈
utilize the derived algorithm, i.e., shaping with CAN (SCAN), where M consists of the periods which contain low-energy
low,i
to achieve orthogonal OOK symbols. samples. We assume that M M = , M
high,i low,i high,i
∩ ∅ ∪
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section M = [0,T ), and E Λ (t) = 1.
low,i s i
{ }
II, we provide system models for the transmitter, channel, and
B. Channel Model
receiver. In Section III, we discuss the sequences-based OOK
and provide the details of the proposed algorithm, i.e., SCAN. The wireless channel is modeled as an exponential power
In Section IV, we present numerical results based on IEEE delay profile (PDP) with independent taps where the un-
lL e−τl
802.11n/ac waveform parameters. We conclude the paper in normalized power of the th tap is expressed as and τ
Section V with final remarks. corresponds to the decay rate. Note that τ = 0 yields a uniform
Notation: Hermitian operation is denoted by ( )H. The PDP. We assume Rayleigh distribution for the amplitude of
·
˜ ∗
operations ( ) and ( ) reverses the order of the elements and each tap.
· ·

3
C. Wake-up Radio Receiver B. SCAN: Shaping with CAN
We assume that WUR skips the samples during CP du- To calculate the expected value in (3), we sample (2)
rations and detects b by comparing the energy on active within the period of [0,T ), where the pth sampling time is
m s
durations without any channel estimation. We also consider given by p/N T , p 0,1,...,N 1 , and N is the
s
× ∈ { − }
that that WUR employs a second order Butterworth low-pass number of samples. The RMSE in (2) can then be calculated
filter (LPF) where its cut-off frequency is denoted by f . approximately as
c
1
III. SEQUENCE-BASED ON-OFF KEYING N−1 L−1 2 2 2
1 pT
ǫ =  (cid:12) {s }kej2πk Np PΛ Ns (cid:19)(cid:12)  .
In this section, we discuss sequence-based OOK and the s (cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:12)
N − (cid:18) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
corresponding algorithm, i.e., SCAN, to obtain the sequences.  X p=0 (cid:12) (cid:12)X k=0 (cid:12) (cid:12) 
(cid:12) (cid:12)
 (cid:12) (cid:12) 
(cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (4)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
A. Problem Formulation
Due to the convolution theorem, the maximum support of the
In this study, our main goal is to find the sequence s IDFT of the fs(pT s/N) 2 is 2L 1 when N 2L 1. Hence,
i
| | − ≥ −
such that the Euclidean distance between fs (t) 2 and Λ (t) N 2L 1 in 4 must also hold true to oversample the basis
i
| i | ≥ −
is minimum while satisfying certain constraints related to function fs(t) 2.
| |
the leakage during the OFF period and flatness in time and To enable tractable algorithms, we propose to modify (4) as
frequency.
1
s N−1 L−1 2 2
In the sequel, we only consider the optimization of and 1
ca0 ǫ = {s }kej2πk Np P {a }p{θ 
omit the index i unless otherwise stated since fs (t) n be m (cid:12) }p(cid:12)
N −
0 X (cid:12) X p (cid:12)
generated through fs 1(t). For example, if T is chosen as p=0 (cid:12) (cid:12)k=0 (cid:12)
active  (cid:12) 
1
T s/2, fs (t) can be the time-reversal of fs (t) . One way FHM(cid:12) s PAθ (cid:12)
= , (5)
| 0 | | 1 | 2
of achieving the time-reversal relationship between the basis √N || − ||
p
s s s ˜s s s∗
functions is to relate and as = or = since the a F CN×N
1 0 1 0 1 0 where = Λ (pT /N), is the DFT matrix,
ain nv der fse ∗ (Fou t)r ,ie rr estr pa en cs tf ivo erm ly.at Tio hn eo cf ho˜s i0 cean od s s1 = =s ˜s∗ 0 a rr ee duf cs e0 s( − tht e) M R{ N×} Lp is tphe mapps ing matri∈ x, A RN×N active is a semi-
f ∈ ∈
s 1 0 orthogonal matrix and obtained removing the zero columns of
0 −
hardware complexity at the transmitter since the transmitter
a
diag , N is the number of non-zero elements in vector
active
can generate the basis functions by changing the order of the a , an{ d θ} CN active×1 is a phase vector.
elements of s . In the cases where T is less than T /2, ∈
0 active s Both (4) and (5) are metrics to measure the distance between
s can be set to e−j2πkT active/T s s by exploiting the
1 }k 0 }k fs(t) 2 and Λ (t), i.e., if ǫ is small, ǫ also becomes small.
{ { m s
time-shifting property of the inverse Fourier transformation. | |
However, (5) achieves it with a quadratic function, i.e., reduces
We express the distance between fs(t) 2 and Λ (t) with
the order of (4). The function in (5) can be thought as a
| |
root-mean-squared error (RMSE) as
generalization of the approach proposed in [11]. The main
1 objective in [11] is to minimize the ISL metric of a unimodular
ǫ = E fs(t) 2 PΛ (t) 2 2 . (2)
s s
| | − sequence , i.e., equivalent to (4) for Λ (t) = 1, = 1,
n (cid:12) (cid:12) o |{ }k|
The optimization probl(cid:12)em that gives the(cid:12)optimal sequence for and P = L. An iterative algorithm based on fast Fourier
transform (FFT), called CAN, is derived by replacing the cost
fs(t) can then be written as
function in (4) with an another cost function, i.e., equivalent to
1
ˆs = argminE fs(t) 2 PΛ (t) 2 2 + λ s (3) a special case of (5). The discussion related to the validity of
∞
s | | − k k
n o the modification is provided in [13]. Since the CAN minimizes
(cid:12) (cid:12)
s.t. c (cid:12): s = 0 (cid:12)
1 L−1 the ISL metric of the sequence, it also targets the sequences
{ } 2
c 2: fs(0) 2 P that lead to low PAPR when the same sequence is used in
first
| | ≤
frequency with an OFDM waveform, i.e., ultraflat polynomials
c 3: fs(t) 2 P leak,t M ,
low
| | ≤ ∈ [15], [16]. In this study, the proposed algorithm is based on
where P and P are the desired values for the basis CAN, called SCAN, and aim at the optimal sequences that
first leak
functions. In (3), we omit the frequency-shift component in (1) lead to any ideal signal shape in time.
as it does not change the cost given in (2). We also regularize We first rewrite the optimization problem given in (3) by
s s
the elements of ˆ by introducing a regularization term ∞ to using the cost function given in (5) as
k k
the RMSE with a parameter denoted by λ 0. When λ > 0,
1
≥ ˆs FHMs PAθ s
= argmin + λ (6)
the regularization term in (3) applies a penalty if the sequence 2 ∞
s,θ √N || − || k k
p
energy is localized on few elements and increase the reliability
s
s.t. c : = 0
of the waveform against frequency-selective channels. The 1 { }L− 21
constraints c , c , and c aim at zero DC tone, smooth ramp- c : FHMs 2 P
1 2 3 2 0 first
|{ } | ≤
up for the ON period, and low instantaneous power on the c : FHMs 2 P ,p N
3 p leak low
OFF period, respectively. Unfortunately, the argument of the |{ } | ≤ ∈
c : θ 2 = 1,p N ,
expectation operator in (3) is a quartic function. Therefore, (3) 4 |{ }p | ∈ high
is not a convex optimization problem. In the following part, where λ is a Lagrange variable, N = p a = 0 and
high { |{ }p 6 }
we propose a tractable algorithm to solve (3). N = p a = 0 . The problem in (6) is still non-convex
low { |{ }p }

4
Table I: Sequences
due to the constraint c . However, the local optima can still
4
be obtained by splitting (6) into two subproblems and solving Sequence #1 Sequence #2 Sequence #3 Sequence #4
0.117∠22.5◦ 0.692∠266.19◦ 0.031∠180◦ 0.225∠50.42◦
them iteratively, i.e., alternating minimization.
0.375∠315.0◦ 0.986∠211.15◦ 0.171∠90◦ 0.705∠324.83◦
s(i−1)
For the ith iteration, the first subproblem for a given
0.784∠247.5◦ 1.119∠157.37◦ 0.509∠0◦ 1.175∠242.64◦
is given by 1.221∠180.0◦ 1.119∠115.63◦ 1.023∠270◦ 1.225∠170.47◦
1.480∠112.5◦ 1.119∠80.70◦ 1.489∠180◦ 1.052∠122.68◦
θ(i) = argmin FHMs(i−1) PAθ (7) 1.367∠45.0◦ 1.119∠34.18◦ 1.557∠90◦ 1.225∠74.16◦
2
θ || − || 0.826∠337.5◦ 0.735∠337.50◦ 1.011∠0◦ 0.980∠0◦
p
s.t. θ 2 = 1,p N . 0∠0◦ 0∠0◦ 0∠0◦ 0∠0◦
|{ }p | ∈ high 0.826∠22.5◦ 0.735∠22.50◦ 1.011∠0◦ 0.980∠0◦
1.367∠315.0◦ 1.119∠304.18◦ 1.557∠270◦ 1.225∠254.16◦
Although (7) is not a convex problem due to the unimodular
1.480∠247.5◦ 1.119∠215.70◦ 1.489∠180◦ 1.052∠122.68◦
vector constraint, the global optimum can be obtained via a 1.221∠180.0◦ 1.119∠115.63◦ 1.023∠90◦ 1.225∠350.47◦
closed-form solution given by θ = ∠ FMs . This is due 0.784∠112.5◦ 1.119∠22.37◦ 0.509∠0◦ 1.175∠242.64◦
p p
th{ c} olumns{ d} 0.375∠45.0◦ 0.986∠301.15◦ 0.171∠270◦ 0.705∠144.83◦
A
to the fact that the support of e of o not intersect
0.117∠337.5◦ 0.692∠221.19◦ 0.031∠180◦ 0.225∠50.42◦
(i.e., semi-orthogonal matrix) and the non-zero elements are
FMs
positive (i.e., does not change the phase of ).
p
{ }
The second subproblem can be expressed as
the first and the second sequences cause more peaky signals
1
s(i) FHMs PAθ(i) s in time as compared to the third and the fourth sequences.
= argmin + λ (8)
2 ∞
s √N || − || k k On the other hand, the first and the second sequences allow
p
s
s.t. c : = 0 smoother transitions between adjacent symbols in WUS since
1 L−1
{ } 2
the CP portion of the corresponding waveforms do not contain
FHMs FHMs
c : , u
2 i 0 0 first
ℜ{{ } } ℑ{{ } } ≤ high energy samples. This is due to the fact that there are no
c : FHMs , FHMs u ,p N .
3 p p leak low high-energy samples on the last 0.8 µs of the corresponding
ℜ{{ } } ℑ{{ } } ≤ ∈
waveforms for b = 0 and b = 1. It is also worth noting that
In (8), the quadratic constraints c and c in (6) are replaced m m
2 3
these sequences are compatible with the WURs which cannot
with the linear constraints which limit the imaginer and real
discard the CP duration since the energy is localized either
components of the samples instead of their powers to simplify
on the first or the last 2 µs. In addition, They can be utilized
the problem. Since (8) is a convex optimization problem, it
for the waveforms which generate an internal guard interval
can be solved by using solvers such as SeDuMi [17].
within IDFT duration (e.g., [18]).
The cost function in (6) always decreases when (7) and
When T is reduced to 1.6 µs to 1.2 µs, the leakage
(8) are solved iteratively since the global optima for both (7) active
on the OFF duration increases. As shown in Figure 1, the
and (8) can be obtained. After certain termination condition
ratio between the peak values on the ON and OFF durations is
is met, the optimized sequence ¯s is obtained as ¯s = √P
s(i)/ s(i) × approximately 78 dB for the third sequence whereas it reduces
.
2
|| || to 49.5 dB for the first sequence. This reduction is due to the
fact that M becomes a larger set while L is fixed. When
low,i
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
λ is 0, there is no penalty applied for the non-uniform power
In this section, we numerically evaluate the sequences distribution of the sequence elements. When λ is set to 2.2
generated through the method derived in Section III-B. For the to control the power distribution, the difference between the
evaluations, we adopt the IEEE 802.11n/ac OFDM parameters, maximum levels on the ON and OFF durations reduces further
i.e., T s = 3.2 µs, ∆f = 312.5 kHz, and T CP = 0.8 µs. to 23.2 dB and 45 dB for the second and the fourth sequences,
We generate the basis functions in by using L = 15 respectively. The power distribution over the subcarriers for
W
adjacent tones. We consider four different optimized sequences each sequence are given in Figure 2. The first and the third
by using the parameter sets given by u = u = sequences allocate more energy on 6-8 tones while the second
leak first
{
1e-3,λ = 0, T = 1.2 µs , u = u = 1e-3, λ = and the fourth sequences have more uniformpower distribution
active leak first
} {
2.2, T = 1.2 µs , u = u = 1e-4, λ = across the 15 tones at the expense of more leakage in time.
active leak first
} {
0, T = 1.6 µs , and u = u = 1e-4, λ =
active leak first
} {
2.2, T = 1.6 µs . For the optimization, the initial
active B. BER Performance for Standalone Scenarios
}
s(0)
sequence is chosen as an all-ones vector of length 15.
In Figure 3, we evaluate the BER performance when the
The optimized sequences for b = 0 are listed in Table I.
m
proposed sequences and the other available OOK waveform
In the simulations, fs (t) is generated by circularly shifting
1 options, i.e., turning on and off the carrier (single tone)
fs (t) in time by T active.
0 and mask-based approach proposed in [9], are utilized. For
multipath channel, we assume that = 10 and τ = 0.1 at
A. Time and Frequency Characteristics L
the sample rate of 20 MHz. We set the sample rate of the
The corresponding waveforms for the sequences in Table I WUR to 20 MHz. Note that the sample rate of the WUR
are provided in Figure 1. While the first and the second can be decreased to reduce the power consumption of the
sequences confine the energy on the duration of 1.2 µs, the WUR. In this case, the corresponding BER curve for WUR
third and the fourth sequences keep the energy on the first half in Figure 3 needs to be shifted to the right proportionally.
of T , i.e., 1.6 µs. Therefore,for the same amount of bit energy, We assume that the cut-off frequency f of LPF at WUR is
s c

5
110000
0 Seq. #1 QPSK
Seq. #2 Seq. #1
]Bd[ rewoP]Bd[ rewoP]Bd[ rewoP]Bd[ rewoP -20
Seq. #2
-40 Seq. #3
1100--11 Seq. #4
-60 Mask-based
Single tone
-80
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
REB
s 1100--22
Rayleigh
0 Seq. #3
Seq. #4
-20
1100--33
-40
-60 AWGN
-80
1100--44
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 00 55 1100 1155 2200 2255
s E /N  [dB]
b 0
Figure 1: The transmitted waveform when bm = 0, i.e., fs (t).
0
Figure 3: Standalone BER performance.
0 not exploit the frequency selectivity. The other options are
within the margin of 1.5 dB. The best performance is achieved
-10
by the second sequence since the power is well-distributed
Seq. #1
-20
Seq. #2 in frequency as compared to others and a shorter T is
active
-30 adopted. The third sequence is the worst one as the energy of
the sequence is localized in frequency as shown in Figure 2
-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10
Subcarriers
and large T causes more noise accumulation.
active
0
-10
C. BER Performance under Multiplexing
-20
Seq. #3
In Figure 4, we evaluate the BER performance of the
Seq. #4
-30
OFDM and WUR receivers when WUS and QAM symbols are
-10 -8 -6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 multiplexed in frequency. We assume that WUS is scheduled
Subcarriers
to the center of the band, i.e., 7,...,7 tones. The QAM
{− }
symbols are allocated to the adjacent subcarriers where the
Figure 2: Power distribution of the sequences over the subcarriers. tone indices are 16,..., 10,10,...,16 . We assume that
{− − }
signal power for WUS and OFDM symbol are identical and
half of the signal power is distributed to 14 QAM symbols.
2.5 MHz. As shown in Figure 3, all of the OOK waveforms The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is calculated at 20 MHz
are at least 6 dB worse than the BER performance of the sample rate. We evaluate two waveform options for WUS,
QPSK symbols in the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) i.e., the proposed scheme with the second sequence and the
channel. This is due to the fact that the Euclidean distance mask-based method proposed in [9]. In Figure 4a, the BER
between the bits is 1/√2 times that of the QPSK symbols and performance at the WUR is provided. The LPF is able to
the non-coherent detection is used at the WUR. In AWGN, the filter out the QAM symbols on adjacent tones and the BER
BER performances for different OOK options are similar to performance at WUR for both approaches acceptable. The
each other. The sequence options which cause shorter T order of the BER curves follows the same order in Figure 3. On
active
duration perform slightly better as compared to the ones with the other hand, the OFDM receiver is sensitive to the existence
larger T duration. This improvement is because the WUR of WUS. As shown in Figure 4b, the BER performance at the
active
accumulates less noise energy when T is small. The OFDM receiver degrades drastically when mask-based OOK is
active
second sequence is slightly worse than the first sequence due to utilized for WUS. The degradation is because the mask-based
its higher leakage on the OFF duration. Nevertheless, because OOK symbols are not orthogonal to the OFDM symbol and
of less noise accumulation, the second sequence perform better contaminate the adjacent tones which are utilized by QAM
than the third and the fourth sequences although it has a higher symbols. On the other hands, the WUS with the proposed
leakage at the OFF period. In AWGN, single tone, mask- scheme is always orthogonal to the subcarriers used for QAM
based method, the third sequence, and the fourth sequences symbols and do not degrade the performance at the OFDM
performs almost identical. However, in fading channel, the receiver since the WUS waveform is generated within the
performance of single tone dramatically deteriorates as it does OFDM framework.

| 0   | 1   | 2   | 3   | 4   | 5   | 6   | 7       |
|:----|:----|:----|:----|:----|:----|:----|:--------|
|     |     |     |     |     |     |     | Seq. #1 |
|     |     |     |     |     |     |     | Seq. #2 |

|    |    |      |    |    | QPSK        |    |
|    |    |      |    |    | Seq. #1     |    |
|    |    |      |    |    | Seq. #2     |    |
|    |    |      |    |    | Seq. #3     |    |
|:---|:---|:-----|:---|:---|:------------|:---|
|    |    |      |    |    | Seq. #4     |    |
|    |    |      |    |    | Mask-based  |    |
|    |    |      |    |    | Single tone |    |
|    |    |      | R  |    | ayleigh     |    |
|    |    | AWGN |    |    |             |    |

|    |    |    |    |    |    |    | Seq. #3   |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    | Seq. #4   |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:----------|

|    |    |    |    |    |    |    | None   |        |    |    |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:-------|:-------|:---|:---|
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |        |        |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    | S      | eq. #1 |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    | S  |        | eq. #2 |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |        |        |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |        |        |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |        |        |    |    |

|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |         |    |    |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:--------|:---|:---|
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    | Seq. #3 |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    | Seq. #4 |    |    |

6
REFERENCES
110000
[1] H. S. Kim and D. D. Wentzloff, “Back-channel wireless communication
OFDM + WUS (Seq.-based)
embedded in wifi-compliant ofdm packets,” IEEE Journal on Selected
OFDM + WUS (Mask-based)
Areas in Communications, vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 3181–3194, Dec 2016.
[2] J. Im, H. S. Kim, and D. D. Wentzloff, “A 335 µw -72dbm receiver for
1100--11
fsk back-channel embedded in 5.8ghz Wi-Fi ofdm packets,” in 2017
IEEE Radio Frequency Integrated Circuits Symposium (RFIC), June
2017, pp. 176–179.
[3] S. Tang, H. Yomo, and Y. Takeuchi, “Optimization of frame length
REBREB
1100--22 modulation-based wake-up control for green wlans,” IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 768–780, Feb 2015.
[4] N. E. Roberts, K. Craig, A. Shrivastava, S. N. Wooters, Y. Shakhsheer,
Rayleigh
B. H. Calhoun, and D. D. Wentzloff, “26.8 a 236nw ???56.5dbm-
1100--33 sensitivity bluetooth low-energy wakeup receiver with energy harvesting
in 65nm cmos,” in 2016 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Con-
AWGN ference (ISSCC), Jan 2016, pp. 450–451.
[5] H. Zhang, C. Li, S. Chen, X. Tan, N. Yan, and H. Min, “A low-
power ofdm-based wake-up mechanism for ioe applications,” IEEE
1100--44
Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 65, no. 2,
--1100 --88 --66 --44 --22 00 22 44 66 88 1100
pp. 181–185, Feb 2018.
SNR [dB]
[6] R. Piyare, A. L. Murphy, C. Kiraly, P. Tosato, and D. Brunelli, “Ultra
(a) BER at WUR low power wake-up radios: A hardware and networking survey,” IEEE
Communications Surveys Tutorials, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 2117–2157,
110000 Fourthquarter 2017.
[7] “PAR: Part 11: Wireless lan medium access control (mac) and phys-
OFDM (Standalone)
OFDM + WUS (Seq.-based) ical layer (phy) specifications amendment: Wake-up radio operation,”
OFDM + WUS (Mask-based) P802.11ba, Sep. 2016.
[8] D. K. McCormick, “IEEE technology report on wake-up radio: An
1100--11
Rayleigh, application, market, and technology impact analysis of low-power/low-
64-QAM latency 802.11 wireless lan interfaces,” 802.11ba Battery Life Improve-
ment: IEEE Technology Report on Wake-Up Radio, pp. 1–56, Nov 2017.
[9] V. Kristem, S. Azizi, and T. Kenney, “2 us OOK waveform generation,”
1100--22 Rayleigh,
IEEE 802.11-18/0492r2, 2018.
16-QAM
[10] A. Sahin, R. Yang, X. Wang, H. Lou, and F. L. Sita, “On the coexistence
of 802.11ax and 802.11ba signals,” IEEE 802.11-18/0659r1, May 2017.
[11] P. Stoica, H. He, and J. Li, “New algorithms for designing unimodular
1100--33 sequences with good correlation properties,” IEEE Transactions on
AWGN, Signal Processing, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 1415–1425, Apr. 2009.
16-QAM
[12] ——, “On designing sequences with impulse-like periodic correlation,”
IEEE Signal Processing Letters, vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 703–706, Aug 2009.
[13] H. He, P. Stoica, and J. Li, “Designing unimodular sequence sets with
1100--44
00 55 1100 1155 2200 2255 3300 3355 good correlations - including an application to MIMO radar,” IEEE
SNR [dB] Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 4391–4405, Nov.
2009.
(b) BER at OFDM receiver
[14] M. Soltanalian, M. M. Naghsh, and P. Stoica, “A fast algorithm
for designing complementary sets of sequences,” Signal Processing,
Figure 4: BER performance when WUS and QAM symbols are multiplexed
vol. 93, no. 7, pp. 2096 – 2102, 2013. [Online]. Available:
in frequency
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165168413000613
[15] T. Erdélyi, “Polynomials with Littlewood-type coefficient constraints,”
Michigan Math. J., vol. 49, pp. 97–111, 2001.
[16] P. Erdo˝s, “Some unsolved problems.” Michigan Math. J., vol. 4, no. 3,
V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
pp. 291–300, 1957.
[17] J. Sturm, “Using SeDuMi 1.02, a MATLAB toolbox for opti-
In this study, we propose a method which generates OOK
mization over symmetric cones,” Optimization Methods and Soft-
symbols by using sequences in the frequency domain. The pro- ware, vol. 11–12, pp. 625–653, 1999, version 1.05 available from
posed method does not cause any interference to the adjacent http://fewcal.kub.nl/sturm.
[18] G. Berardinelli, F. M. L. Tavares, T. B. Sørensen, P. Mogensen, and
subcarriers and enables orthogonal multiplexing of WUSs and
K. Pajukoski, “Zero-tail DFT-spread-OFDM signals,” in IEEE GLOBE-
OFDM waveforms. We derive the sequences with a tractable COM Workshops (GC Wkshps), Dec 2013, pp. 229–234.
algorithm relying on CAN and demonstrate the performance
of four optimized sequences by considering the leakage on
the OFF period and the flatness of the corresponding wave-
forms in time and frequency. The numerical results show
that the proposed approach removes the interference-floor at
OFDM receiver when OFDM-based waveforms and WUS are
multiplexed in the frequency domain. In addition, the WUR
performance is improved when the energy distribution of a
coded OOK symbol in frequency is even and the leakage on
the OFF period is low. Multiplexing multiple WUSs, obtaining
scalable expressions of the sequences, and packing more than
two OOK symbols within one OFDM symbol duration are
several directions for the extension of this work.

|    |    |    |    |    |     | OFDM   | + WUS   | (Seq.-ba   | sed)   |    |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:----|:-------|:--------|:-----------|:-------|:---|
|    |    |    |    |    |     | OFDM   | + WUS   | (Mask-b    | ased)  |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        | Rayle   | igh        |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    | A  | WGN |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |     |        |         |            |        |    |

|    |     |     |           |    | OFDM (   | Standalone)   |          |    |
|:---|:----|:----|:----------|:---|:---------|:--------------|:---------|:---|
|    |     |     |           |    | OFDM     | + WUS (Seq    | .-based) |    |
|    |     |     |           |    | OFDM     | + WUS (Mas    | k-based) |    |
|    |     |     |           |    |          |               |          |    |
|    |     |     |           |    | Ray      | leigh,        |          |    |
|    |     |     |           |    | 64-      | QAM           |          |    |
|    |     |     |           |    |          |               |          |    |
|    |     |     |           |    |          |               |          |    |
|    |     |     | Rayleigh, |    |          |               |          |    |
|    |     | 1   | 6-QAM     |    |          |               |          |    |
|    |     |     |           |    |          |               |          |    |
|    |     |     |           |    |          |               |          |    |
|    |     |     |           |    |          |               |          |    |
|    |     |     |           |    |          |               |          |    |
|    | AW  | GN, |           |    |          |               |          |    |
|    | 16- | QAM |           |    |          |               |          |    |
|    |     |     |           |    |          |               |          |    |
|    |     |     |           |    |          |               |          |    |
|    |     |     |           |    |          |               |          |    |