# Cracking The Bread Code
DEPRECATED. Please see the sourdough framework for a complete rewrite.
Learnhowtomastertheartofbakingtheprogrammerway. Ifyouloveprogramming,youwillalsoen‑
joy breaking some bread. A/B test, iterate and ultimately become a self‑taught baker. This repository
is dedicated to becoming your bread manifesto with useful tricks and hacks. Furthermore, the goal is
to illustrate how easy making bread is and that you can get started today without expensive tools.
This repository is still work in progress and will be updated continuously. Feel free open up issues
when facing problems. Pull‑requests with custom recipes are welcome too! Happy baking.
1

Yeast based bread
Yeast is the easiest way to get started baking bread. You can use either dry yeast or fresh yeast. Yeast
ferments your dough by converting parts of the dough into gas. This gas inflates your dough.
• Basic bread
• Banana bread
• Burger buns
Sourdough based bread
Sourdoughbreadisanallnaturalbreadwithoutanyaddedyeast. Thedoughgivesthebreadanamaz‑
ing, you guessed it, sour taste. Any yeast bread can also be made with sourdough instead of yeast.
All of those recipes assume that you have made your own sourdough starter. The process takes ap‑
proximately 7 days to complete:
• Make your own sourdough starter
2

Once you have your sourdough starter you can proceed with the next recipes.
• Basic sourdough bread
• Portuguese inspired Broa corn bread
• Mischbrot aka. Graubrot
• Franconian bread
• Sourdough Pizza
• Sourdough Pasta
• Sourdough Sandwich Loaf
Common Problems / FAQ
See the guide Common problems / FAQ for strategies to deal with frequent pitfalls that arise when
baking.
Experiments
This section contains experiments where N breads are baked with only one parameter change each.
This helps to visualize what impact a change of a single parameter has on the final product. Feel free
to submit your own experiments as a PR. The more experiments there the merrier.
• Different hydration levels on yeast bread
• Proofing Sourdough at room temperature for 3 hours vs. 10 hours fridge
• Oiled loaf pan vs. parchment papered loaf pan
Ideas for custom experiments? Please make a PR and share them.
Tools
• Which tools should you buy for baking? Busting some of the tooling myths here. TLDR ‑ you
don’t need any tools except a bowl and heat source.
Motivation
Haveyoueverrelishedthetasteofafreshandwarmbreadwithacrispycrust? Doyouknowthesound
ofthecrispycrustwhenyoutakeabite? Haveyoueverexperiencedthedeliciousandhomeyscentof
a bread coming right out of the oven?
3

When baking bread, you experience a whole variety of emotions and sensations. Furthermore, you
step into a world where simplicity can become very complex. However, reaching perfection is amaz‑
ing! The feeling of having crafted a perfect combination of all natural ingredients is unique and so
special. Isay“aperfectcombination”,not“theperfectcombination”becausethatisthesecret. There
is no such thing as the perfect bread. There are so many different possibilities, combinations, ingre‑
dients, parameters — every bread is unique!
Being a programmer myself, I lacked scientific resources on the internet. In my daytime job, we use
A/B testing for almost everything. Why not apply the same proven methodologies to baking?
All the recipes I provide have been A/B tested by myself with different variations. I encourage you to
do the same. Try to recreate the same bread with only one parameter changing at the time. That way
youcaniteratetofindyourpersonalpreferredbreadcombination. Makenotesandlogallthedifferent
types bread you made. Slowly, bread by bread you will become better.
You will fail, in fact, you will fail often. With every fail, ask yourself what you could have done better.
That’showIhavelearnedandstilllearnwitheverybreadIbake. That’swhatIcallThe Bread Code.
I hope this repository motivates people around the world to try and become better bakers.
Links
• YouTube Account
• Reddit
• Instagram
4