Optical Absorption of Poly(thiophene vinylene) Conjugated Polymers. Experiment
and First Principle Theory.
A. V. Gavrilenko, T. D. Matos, C. E. Bonner, S.-S. Sun, C. Zhang, and V. I. Gavrilenko
Center for Materials Research, Norfolk State University, 700 Park Ave, Norfolk, VA 23504
Optical absorption spectra of poly(thiophene vinylene) (PTV) conjugated polymers have been
studied at room temperature in the spectral range of 450 to 800 nm. A dominant peak located at
577 nm and a prominent shoulder at 619 nm are observed. Another shoulder located at 685 nm is
observed at high concentration and after additional treatment (heat, sonification) only. Equilibrium
atomic geometries and optical absorption of PTV conjugated polymers have also been studied by
first principles density functional theory (DFT). For PTV in solvent, the theoretical calculations
8002 beF 5  ]hp-mehc.scisyhp[  1v9350.2080:viXra predict two equilibrium geometries with different interchain distances. By comparative analysis of
the experimental and theoretical data, it is demonstrated that the new measured long-wavelength
optical absorption shoulder is consistent with new optical absorption peak predicted for most ener-
getically favorable PTV phase in the solvent. This shoulder is interpreted as a direct indication of
increased interchain interaction in the solvent which has caused additional electronic energy struc-
ture transformations.
I. INTRODUCTION gated polymer with a high conductivity [17, 18, 19, 20].
These polymers display high nonlinear optical responses
and moderate charge mobilities [21]. In addition, PTV
The search for inexpensive renewable energy sources
has a band gap of about 1.7eV and, as a result, can be
has sparked considerable interest in the development of
considered as a low-bandgap polymer [22].
photovoltaics based on conjugated polymers and organic
Optical absorption and emission spectra of conjugated
molecules [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. Compared to silicon-based de-
polymers exhibit well pronounced peak attributed to the
vices, polymer solar cells are lightweight, inexpensive to
excitations of π −π∗ electron transitions [2, 3]. Vibronic
fabricate, flexible, and have an ultra-fast opto-electronic
excitations in well-ordered polymers could be seen as
response [6, 7]. They also exhibit a nearly continuous
additional fine structures [2]. However, not all compo-
tunability of the energy levels and band gaps via molec-
nents of the fine structure in the optical absorption and
ular design and synthesis, versatile materials processing
emission spectra can be attributed to exciton-phonon
and device fabrication schemes, and low cost industrial
coupling. It has been demonstrated earlier that the
manufacturing on a large scale [8, 9]. However, the en-
long-wavelength shoulder in optical absorption spectra of
ergy conversion efficiency of existing organic and poly-
poly(3-hexylthiophene) has different nature and it could
meric solar cells with donor/acceptor blends is still less
be interpreted as the effect of interchain interaction [3].
than 5% [10]. Though both organic and conventional
Due to the degree of difficulty in devising new synthesis
solar cells operate by absorbing light, a fundamental dif-
schemes, it is important to rely on computational models
ference was recognized almost immediately.
which can predict the properties, since the characteriza-
In organic materials, the light absorption results in the tion of polymers can only be done once the polymer has
formation of excitons rather than the free electrons and been successfully synthesized. A guided approach to the
holes directly produced in inorganic semiconductors, such design of new organic materials is preferential. State-
as silicon [2, 3, 11]. The bandgaps of copolymers can be of-the-art first principle methods based on the Density
tailored by combining various repeat units of polymers Functional Theory (DFT) are very useful tools for pro-
with different bandgaps [12]. One important approach viding a detailed understanding of structural, electronic,
to modify bandgaps of polyaromatics systems is to in- and optical processes [23, 24, 25]. In this work we stud-
corporate vinylene linkages between the aromatic rings ied optical absorption of poly(thiophene vinylene) (PTV)
[13, 14, 15]. This has been demonstrated by the poly(p- conjugated polymers. Based on extensive first princi-
phenylene vinylene) (PPV) and poly(thiophene vinylene) ple modeling of the ground state and optical absorption,
(PTV) systems, yielding bandgaps 0.3 eV lower than that we will demonstrate the possible coexistence of two sta-
of polyphenylene and polythiophene systems [14]. The ble geometrical phases with different interchain distances.
vinylene bond not only reduces the band gap of the poly- Comparison with measured experimental data show that
mer but also acts as a spacer to reduce steric hinderance the observed long-wavelegth optical absorption shoulder
on successive aromatic rings, therefore increasing the de- is consistent with a predicted geometrical phase with a
gree of coplanarity of the conjugated polymer backbone smaller interchain distance.
[12]. An advantage of PTV and its derivatives is their Previous works on PPV [26, 27] showed that crystalline
high absorption in the visible range of the spectrum, arrangement crucially affects the optical properties of the
making them excellent candidates for energy alternatives polymer films and interchain interactions can be viewed
[16]. For solar cell applications, poly(thiophene vinylene) as a tunable parameter for the design of efficient elec-
(PTV) has already proven to be an interesting conju- tronic devices based on organic materials. 3D arrange-

2
FIG. 1: Chemical structure of poly(3-dodecyl-2,5-thiophene
vinylene). The PTV with n=20 was used for all UV-Vis mea-
surements.
ment is also a crucial element for the design of materi-
als with efficient transport properties. In this work we
studied effect of the aggregation in PTV which could be
considered as an intermediate phase between liquid and
solid. Our goal is to understand how aggregation af-
fects optical absorption in PTV. Based on extensive first
FIG. 2: Optical absorption spectra dependance on heating
principle modeling combined with experiment we demon-
and sonification treatment of PTV polymersat the concentra-
strate that optical absorption spectra of PTV polymers
tion of 1mM. The solid (black) line is the absorption of the
indeed show specific features which could be interpreted
PTV heated for 1 min without sonification. The dashed (red)
as a result of interchain interaction. This paper is orga-
line and the dotted (blue) line show the absorption spectrum
nized in the following way. First we describe fabrication
of the PTV heated for 1 min and 3 min, respectively, followed
procedure of PTV polymers and measurement conditions
by sonification. Sonification was performed at a frequency of
of optical absorption spectra. In the following section we 40 kHz for 60 min.
describe theoretical methods used in this work for equilib-
rium geometry study and for optical calculations. In the
final section we present comparative analysis of predicted (heating and sonification) results in slight red shift stabi-
and measured optical absorption spectra, supported by lizing spectral location of optical absorption against fur-
calculated Projected Density Of States (PDOS) and by ther treatments (see Fig. 2). After the treatment of the
equilibrium geometry studies in comparison with avail- solution we observed a dominant absorption peak located
able data in literature. at λ = 577nm accompanied by a prominent shoul-
max
der located at 619 nm (A-shoulder). This shoulder was
observed on all samples studied and it shows relatively
weak dependence on concentration and heat-sonification
II. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND
treatment.
RESULTS
Another low intensity shoulder is observed around
685 nm (B-shoulder). Its strong dependence on exter-
The mono-end functionalized poly(3-dodecyl-2,5-
nal treatment is essentially different from A-shoulder as
thiophene vinylene) (PTV) conjugated polymer (see
demonstrated in Fig. 2: the intensity of the B-shoulder
chemical structure in Fig. 1) used for UV-
decreases with more intense treatment untill becomming
Vis measurement was synthesized by Horner-Emmons
undetectable. The low heating caused slight red shift
coupling of (3-dodecyl-thiophen-2-ylmethyl)-phosphonic
of optical absorption from its initial spectral location as
acid diethyl ester with 3-dodecyl-5-formyl-thiophen-2-
shown in Fig. 2. Further external treatment does not
ylmethyl)-phosphonic acid diethyl ester. Samples were
affect the spectral location of the optical absorption.
prepared according to the following procedure. In or-
der to measure single chain optical response, a series
of 5mM solutions were prepared for concentration de-
pendance studies. The solid samples were mechanically III. THEORETICAL METHOD AND RESULTS
grinded and dissolved in chloroform. The solutions were
additionally heated and exposed to external mechanical Density functional theory (DFT) has been shown for
vibration field (sonification) at 40 kHz for 60 minutes. decades to be very successful in the ground state analysis
From this mixture aliquots were extracted to prepare 1 of different materials [28]. In order to be able to predict
mM solutions used for measurements. physical properties of a conjugated polymer system it is
Optical absorption spectra were measured on a Var- important to realistically describe both short (covalent)
ian Cary-5 spectrophotometer at room temperature in and long range (Coulomb and van der Waals, vdW) com-
spectral range 400 to 800 nm. Fig. 2 presents UV-vis ponents of intermolecular interactions [29]. Local density
heating and sonification treatment studies of regioreg- (LDA) and generalized gradient approximations (GGA)
ular PTV solutions. Application of external treatment are frequently used to account for the exchange and cor-

3
(a)Unit cell (b)d2 = 3.75˚A (c)d2 = 3.7˚A
FIG. 3: 3D-view of the poly(thiophene vinylene) unit cell (a)
and equilibrium geometries of straight (b) and tilted (c) chain
configutaions. Optimized unit cell dimensions are shown by
numbers.
FIG. 4: Total energy of the system versus PTV unit cell length
d2. Dashed and solid lines correspond to straight and tilted
relation (XC) interaction. The vdW interactions is not chain geometies shown in Fig. 3(b) and Fig. 3(c), respec-
included in standard DFT. However, detailed analysis tively.
of organic molecule adsorption on solid surface demon-
strates that around equilibrium the kinetic energy of va-
lence electrons remains mainly repulsive, and XC effects In contrast to other implementations of CSMs, COSMO
are mostly responsible for the attraction [29]. It has calculates the screening charges using a boundary condi-
been shown that equilibrium distance between organic tion for a conductor. These charges are then scaled by a
molecule and solid (graphene) surface predicted by LDA factor f(ε) = (ε−1)/(ε+1/2), to obtain a good approx-
is in good agreement to the value followed from explicit imation for the screening charges in a dielectric medium.
inclusion of the vdW into the interaction Hamiltonian In such a way, by using COSMO, we avoid complexity
[29]. by specifying the actual structure of the solvent still in-
In this work we used ab initio pseudopotential method corporating into the theory the screening effect in the
within the DFT and the supercell (sc) formalism to study solution.
the effects of interchain interaction of the PTV. The sys- Only Coulombic interaction providing most important
tem was modeled as an infinite chain as shown in Fig. contribution to the interchain interaction [29] is included.
3(a). The geometry optimizations were performed using The unit cell is replicated in all 3 dimensions, the height,
the LDA method [30] employing norm-conserving pseu- d3, was chosen to be 15 ˚A in order to quench the inter-
dopotentials [31] using the DMol3 [32] software package action between the thiophene ring and the methyl group.
until all forces were below 0.05 eV/˚A. An initial set of 28 We obtained very weak effect of the d3 on optics there-
irreducible k-points was used. We have explicitly checked fore this value was constrained. The equilibrium inter-
that the structural and binding properties of our system molecular distance, d1=6.55˚A, was determined by clus-
are well converged for the double numerical plus polar- ter calculation of a single polymer chain of 3 units. The
ization basis set used. The use of the exact DFT spheri- interchain distance d2 was varied between 10 ˚A and 3 ˚A
cal atomic orbitals has several advantages. For one, the in units of 0.1 ˚A.
molecule can be dissociated exactly to its constituent Optical absorption spectra of the PTV conjugated
atoms (within the DFT context). Because of the local polymers are calculated within the independent particles
character of these orbitals, basis set superposition effects picture (random phase approximation, RPA) employing
[33] are minimized and good accuracy is achieved even ultrasoft pseudopotentials [31]. For optical line shape
for weak bonds. Solvent effects were taken into account analysis inclusion of excitonic effects in polymers is nesse-
during geometry optimization. cary [24]. This technically challenging theory of optical
In order to simulate the effects of a solvent the response in polymers is out of scope of present study. In
COnductor-like Screening MOdel (COSMO) [34, 35] is this work we focus on relative changes of electron energy
used within DMol3. COSMO is a continuum solvation structure and optical response caused by atomic geome-
model (CSM) [36] in which the solute molecule forms a try modifications in different equilibrium polymer phases,
cavity within the dielectric continuum of permittivity, ε, which could be realistically described without inclusion of
that represents the solvent. The charge distribution of many-body efects in optics [25, 37]. Equilibrium geom-
the solute polarizes the dielectric medium. The response etry and self-consistently calculated eigen energies and
of the dielectric medium is described by the generation of eigen values are used as inputs for optics. Optical func-
screening (or polarization) charges on the cavity surface. tions are obtained using CASTEP-GGA method with a

4
planewave cutoff of 400 eV. More details of our approach
can be found in [25]. A blue-shift of 0.18 eV is applied to
the calculated spectrum to match experimental data. It
should be noted that the Kohn-Sham eigenvalues do not
interpret as a quasiparticle energy requiring quasiparticle
(QP) correction [38]. The QP correction is a wave-vector
dependent shift of the conduction band with respect to
the valence band. This is attributed to a discontinuity
in the exchange-correlation potential as the system goes
from (N)-electrons to (N+1)-electrons during the excita-
tion process. It has been demonstrated in [26, 27], how-
ever, that in polymers exciton correction compensates
QP shift resulting in smaller correction values than e.g.
in semiconductors [38], as obtained in this work.
FIG. 5: Calculated optical absorption spectra for the PTV
A. Equilibrium Geometry
configurations shown in Figs. 3(b) and 3(c).
In order to model the PTV structure it is important to
first determine the equilibrium configuration. As stated
B. Optical Absorption
before the polymer was modeled as an infinite chain in
a unit cell, see Fig. 3. Interchain interaction is an im-
Optical absorption spectra of the PTV conjugated
portant aspect since the close proximity of neighboring
polymers are calculated within the independent parti-
chains will split the electronic states of the polymer,
cles picture (random phase approximation, RPA) em-
thereby reducing the bandgap and creating additional
ploying norm-conserving pseudopotentials [31]. For op-
states. Only Coulombic interaction providing most im-
tical line shape analysis inclusion of excitonic effects in
portant contribution to the interchain interaction [29] is
polymers is nessecary [24]. This technically challenging
taken into account. The unit cell is replicated in all 3 di-
theory of optical response in polymers is out of scope of
mensions, the height, d3, was chosen to be 15 ˚A in order
present study. In this work we focus on relative changes
to quench the interaction between the thiophene ring and
of electron energy structure and optical response caused
the methyl group. We obtained very weak effect of the
by atomic geometry modifications in diferent equilib-
d3 on optics therefore this value was constrained. The
rium polymer phases, which could be realistically de-
equilibrium intermolecular distance, d1=6.55˚A, was de-
scribed without inclusion of many-body efects in optics
termined by cluster calculation of a single polymer chain
[25, 37]. Equilibrium geometry and self-consistently cal-
of 3 units.
culated eigen energies and eigen values are used as in-
One of the most important findings of this work is a
puts for optics. Optical functions are obtained using
very strong dependence of the PTV polymer ground state
CASTEP-GGA method. More details of our approach
on the interchain distance (d2). This point is addressed
can be found in [25]. As discussed above the blue-shift
here in detail. The equilibrium interchain distance is
of 0.18 eV is applied to the calculated spectrum in order
studied by a series of unit cell length d2 optimizations
to match the experimental bandgap.
varying between 10 and 3 ˚A in steps of 0.05 ˚A. We re-
In Fig. 5 we present calculated optical absorption spec-
port two equilibrium geometry configurations character-
tra coresponding to the predicted tilted (dashed (back))
ized by different total energy relaxation paths but having
and straight (solid (blue)) PTV polymer chain geome-
almost the same unit cell legth: d2=3.75˚A and d2=3.7˚A,
tries. The straight polymer chain configuration (see Fig.
see Fig. 4.
3(b)) is characterised by the dominant optical absorption
It is important to note that accordingly to our finding peak coresponding to the π−π∗ electron excitations (see
the GGA method within CASTEP which employs ab ini- solid (blue) line in Fig. 5). Tilting and decrease of the
tio pseudopotentials does not predict a saddle point in interchain distance correspond to an energetically favor-
total energy curve; as the layers come closer together the able geometrical phase causing dramatic modifications
energy of the system increases without going through a of the spectrum: main peak is blue shifted and in ad-
minimum. In contrast, the LDA method does not contain dition a new long-wavelength peak appears. Analysis of
gradient corrections to the charge density (as the GGA) calculated PDOS spectra indicates that new optical ab-
correctly predicts equilibrium distances between polymer sorption peak is a consequence of splitting of the bonding
chains, even though it underestimates the energy of the and antibonding π−electron states due to decrease of in-
system. This observation for molecular systems has been terchain distance, relative displacement of neighbouring
reported earlier [29]. polymer chain, that causes changes of π−orbitals overlap

5
ical absorption spectrum generated from the data of both
predicted phases (see Fig. 5). The resulting spectrum is
obtained assuming relative weight of the straight:tilted
phases as 0.2:1.0. A recent study showed that in conju-
gated polymers there is a significant impact on the in-
trachain mobility by ring torsion [39]. However, since
the whole chain is rotated rather than the ring itself, no
significant reduction of coplanarity is predicted and as a
result charge mobility remains unaffected.
It has been currently well understood that optical
absorption (emission) spectra of molecular systems are
characterized by the contributions of both electronic and
vibronic excitations. Consequently in many cases vi-
bronic fine structure is superimposed on electronic op-
tical absorption (emission) spectrum [2, 3]. Our exper-
imental data seem to confirm this issue: the measured
A-shoulder (located at 619 nm) weekly depent on treat-
ment, supporting vibronic character of A-shoulder (see
FIG. 6: Comparison of experimental spectrum coresponding
Fig. 2). On the other hand our calculations predicts
to low-heating and sonification treatment of the PTV poly-
a relative spectral shift of the main optical absorption
mer, solid (black) line, and the calculated optical absorption
peak between tilted and straight phases (Fig. 5) which
spectra, dashed (blue) line.
is very close to the measured spectral shift between main
peak position and A-shoulder. This suggest that straight
phase may also contribute to A-shouder (see Fig. 6), in
and strong increase of interchain interaction. Note that
particular, if the coexistence of two phases will be en-
calculated electron energy structure does not incorporate
hanced by external conditions.
any vibronic contributions normally presented in molec-
ular systems. Therefore weak shoulders on calculated Our results suggest substantially different interpreta-
optical spectra relate to electronic states only. tion of B-shoulder located at 685 nm (see Fig. 2). Rel-
ative intensity of B-shoulder is strongly dependent on
treatment. Spectral position of B-shoulder agrees well
IV. DISCUSSION with that of new optical absorption peak predicted for
the tilted phase (Fig. 6). According to the above anal-
ysis, the B-shoulder appears as the result of splitting
The equilibrium dimensions of the super cell of the
of the bonding and antibonding π−electron states due
PTV polymer are determined from total energy mini-
to decrease of interchain distance, relative displacement
mization method. The effect of the interchain interac-
of neighboring polymer chain, that causes changes of
tions on optical absorption spectra has been studied by
π−orbitals overlap and strong increase of interchain in-
varying the super cell length d2 perpendicular to the
teraction. This interpretation is in the alley of the com-
PTV chain direction, see Fig. 3. The predicted equilib-
rium value of d2=3.75 ˚A (that is equal to the interchain plex optical absorption and emission study [3] of poly(3-
hexyl thiophene) polymers, where the measured lowest
distance, d ), and corresponds to absolute energy mini-
i
energy feature in the π−π∗ region of the optical absorp-
mum of straight geometry (see Fig. 3(b)). However, our
tion spectrum was associated with an interchain absorp-
theoretical calculations predict another energetically fa-
tion, the intensity of which was shown to be correlated
vorable geometrical phase of the PTV polymer (see Fig.
4) with predicted equilibrium value of d2=3.70 ˚A and with the degree of order in the polymer.
coresponding interchain distance value of d =3.29 ˚A see Results of this work highlight further studies of poly-
i
Fig. 3(c). Equilibrium PTV configuration in this case is mer optics. In particular, our conclusions about flexibili-
characterized by substantial atomic reconstruction: the ties of aggregation structures made from the comparison
out of plane rotation of the thiophene ring by 27◦, rela- between theory and experiment are based on few assum-
tive displacement of neighbouring chains, and additional sions. Agreement between calculated and measured opti-
in-plane atomic distortions. cal absorption spectra shown in Fig. 5 is achieved by as-
Equilibrium geometry analysis of PTV polymers cleary sumtion of the coexistance in solution of aggregated and
predicts two geometrical phases with straight (Fig. 3(b)) non-aggregated phases with relative weight of 0.2:1.0.
and tilted (Fig. 3(c)) chain geometries. Accordingly to Note that our analysis is currently limitted to optical
the total energy minimisation study the titlted geometry absorption attributed to the π − π∗ delocalized electron
is the most favorable one (see Fig. 4). However, predicted excitations. Analysis of theoretical predictions of the lo-
energy difference of 0.16 eV between two phases minima cal atomic structure modifications in polymer chains in
allows for their coexistence at room temperature. For solution obtained in this work remains out of the scope
comparison with experiment in Fig. 6 we present theoret- of present paper since additional experimental data are

6
required. Infrared and Raman spectroscopy methods are cally favorable. These phases are characterized with dif-
sensitive to the local vibrations and could therefore pro- ferent interchain distances and chain distortions. Mea-
vide with more direct information about atomic structure sured optical absorption spectra indicate appearance of
modifications. In combination with modeling this addi- long-wavelength shoulder strongly dependent on polymer
tional results will be very important for detailed under- treatment (heating and sonification). Based on the first
standing of ground state and optics of polymers as well principle modeling of the ground state and optical ab-
as for polymer materials engineering, which is a subject sorption, the measured long-wavelength shoulder in PTV
of future studies in the field. polymers is interpreted as an indication of increased in-
terchain interaction in tilted phase.
V. CONCLUSIONS
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The optical absorption spectra of PTV conjugated
polymers have been studied both experimentally and the-
oretically. At equilibrium, the PTV chains are character- This work is supported by STC MDITR NSF DMR-
ized by two different geometric configurations: straight 0120967, NSF PREM DRM-0611430, NSF NCN EEC-
and tilted, with the tilted configuration more energeti- 0228390, and NASA CREAM NCC3-1035.
[1] J. J. M. Halls and R. H. Friend, Clean electricity from [20] A. Henckens, L. J. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande, M. Knip-
photovoltaics (Imperial College Press, 2001), vol. 1 of per, J. Manca, T. Aernouts, and J. Poortmans, SPIE
Photoconversion of Energy, chap. Organic Photovoltaic Proceedings 5464 (2004).
Devices, pp. 337–445. [21] R. S. Loewe and R. D. McCullough, Chem. Mater. 12,
[2] M. C. Gurau, D. M. Delongchamp, B. M. Vogel, E. K. 3214 (2000).
Lin, D. A. Fisher, S. Sambasivan, and L. J. Richter, [22] A. Henckens, K. Colladet, S. Fourier, T. J. Cleij, L. Lut-
Langmuir 23, 834 (2007). sen, J. Gelan, and D. Vanderzande, Macromolecules 38,
[3] P. J. Brown, D. S. Thomas, A. Ko¨hler, J. S. Wilson, J.- 19 (2005).
S. Kim, C. M. Ramsdale, H. Sirringhaus, , and R. H. [23] P. Puschnig and C. Ambrosch-Draxl, Synth. Met. 119,
Friend, Phys. Rev. B 67, 064203 (2003). 245 (2001).
[4] B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B 107, 4688 (2003). [24] M. Rohlfing, M. L. Tiago, and S. G. Louie, Synth. Met.
[5] C. J. Brabec, F. Padinger, N. S. Sariciftci, and J. C. 116, 101 (2001).
Hummelen, J.Appl. Phys. 85, 6866 (1999). [25] V. I. Gavrilenko, Lecture Notes in Computer Science
[6] T. A. Skotheim, ed., Handbook of Conducting Polymers (Springer-Verlag, 2006), chap. Ab initio Modeling of
(CRC Press, 1997), 2nd ed. Optical Properties of Organic Molecules and Molecular
[7] R. D. McCullough, Adv. Mater. 20, 93 (1998). Complexes, pp. 89–96.
[8] X. Wu, T.-A. Chen, and R. D. Rieke, Macromolecules [26] A. Ruini, M. J. Caldas, G. Bussi, and E. Molinari, PRL
28, 2101 (1995). 88, 206403 (2002).
[9] M. M. Bouman and E. W. Meijer, Adv. Mater. 7, 385 [27] A. Ferretti, A. Ruini, E. Molinari, and M. J. Caldas, PRL
(1995). 90, 086401 (2003).
[10] S.-S. Sun and N. S. Sariciftci, Organic Photovoltaics: [28] W. Kohn, A. D. Becke, and R. G. Parr, J. Phys. Chem.
Mechanisms, Materials, and Devices (CRC Press, 2005). 100, 12974 (1996).
[11] T. D. Matos, Master’s thesis, Norfolk State University [29] F. Ortmann, W. G. Schmidt, and F. Bechstedt, Phys.
(2007). Rev. Lett. 95, 186101 (2005).
[12] Y. Fu, H. Cheng, and R. L. Elsenbaumer, Chem. Mater. [30] J. P. Perdew and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. B 45, 13244
9, 1720 (1997). (1992).
[13] A. O. Patil, A. J. Heeger, and F. Wudl, Chem. Rev. 88, [31] D. R. Hamann, M. Schluter, and C. Chiang, Phys. Rev.
183 (1988). Lett. 43, 1494 (1979).
[14] H. Eckhardt, L. W. Shacklette, K. Y. Jen, and R. L. [32] B. Delley, J. Chem. Phys. 113, 7756 (2000).
Elsenbaumer, J. Chem. Phys. 91, 1303 (1989). [33] B. Delley, J. Chem. Phys. 92, 508 (1990).
[15] M. L. Blohm, J. E. Pickett, and P. C. Van Dort, Macro- [34] A. Klamt and G. Schu¨u¨rmann, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin.
molecules 26, 2704 (1993). Trans. 2, 799 (1993).
[16] A. Dhanabalan, J. K. J. van Duren, P. A. van Hal, J. L. J. [35] B. Delley, Mol. Simul. 32, 117 (2006).
van Dongen, and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater. [36] J. Tomasi and M. Persico, Chem. Rev. 94, 2027 (1994).
11, 255 (2001). [37] V. I. Gavrilenko and F. Bechstedt, Phys. Rev. B 55, 4344
[17] H. Fuchigami, A. Tsumura, and H. Koezuka, Appl. Phys. (1997).
Lett. 63, 1372 (1993). [38] R. W. Godby, Top. Appl. Phys. 69, 51 (1992).
[18] A. Brown, C. Jarrett, D. de Leeuw, and M. Matters, [39] M. Hultell and S. Stafstro¨m, Phys. Rev. B 75, 104304
Synth. Met. 88, 37 (1997). (2007).
[19] L. K. J. Vandamme, R. Feyaerts, G. Trefa´n, and
C. Detcheverry, J. Appl. Phys. 91, 719 (2002).