docker‑zipkin
Archived
Thisrepositoryisarchivedasithasbeenfoldedintohttps://github.com/openzipkin/zipkin/tree/master/docker
Overview
This repository contains the Docker build definition and release process for Zipkin Server. It also con‑
tains test images for transport and storage backends such as Kafka or Cassandra.
Automatically built images are available on Quay.io under the OpenZipkin organization, and are mir‑
rored to Docker Hub.
Regarding production usage
The only images OpenZipkin provides for production use are: * openzipkin/zipkin: The core server
image that hosts the Zipkin UI, Api and Collector features. * openzipkin/zipkin‑slim: The stripped
server image that hosts the Zipkin UI and Api features, but only supports in‑memory or Elasticsearch
storage with HTTP or gRPC span collectors. * openzipkin/zipkin‑dependencies: pre‑aggregates data
such that http://your_host:9411/dependency shows links between services.
If you are using these images and run into problems, please raise an issue or join gitter.
The other images here, and docker‑compose, are for development and exploration purposes. For
example, they aim to help you integrate an entire zipkin system for testing purposes, without having
to understand how everything works, and without having to download gigabytes of files.
For example, openzipkin/zipkin-cassandra was not designed for real usage. You’ll notice
it has no configuration available to run more than one node sensibly, neither does it handle file sys‑
tems as one would “in real life”. We expect production users to use canonical images for storage or
transports like Kafka, and only those testing or learning zipkin to use the ones we have here.
Running
Zipkin has no dependencies, for example you can run an in‑memory zipkin server like so: docker
run -d -p 9411:9411 openzipkin/zipkin-slim
See the ui at (docker ip):9411
In the ui ‑ click zipkin‑server, then click “Find Traces”.
1

Configuration
Configuration is via environment variables, defined by zipkin‑server. Notably, you’ll want to
look at the STORAGE_TYPE environment variables, which include “cassandra”, “mysql” and
“elasticsearch”.
Note: the openzipkin/zipkin-slim image only supports “elasticsearch” storage. To use other
storage types, you must use the main image openzipkin/zipkin.
When in docker, the following environment variables also apply
• JAVA_OPTS: Use to set java arguments, such as heap size or trust store location.
• STORAGE_PORT_9042_TCP_ADDR – A Cassandra node listening on port 9042. This environ‑
mentvariableistypicallysetbylinkingacontainerrunningzipkin-cassandraas“storage”
when you start the container.
• STORAGE_PORT_3306_TCP_ADDR–AMySQLnodelisteningonport3306. Thisenvironment
variable is typically set by linking a container running zipkin-mysql as “storage” when you
start the container.
• STORAGE_PORT_9200_TCP_ADDR – An Elasticsearch node listening on port 9200. This envi‑
ronment variable is typically set by linking a container running zipkin-elasticsearch as
“storage” when you start the container. This is ignored when ES_HOSTS or ES_AWS_DOMAIN
are set.
• KAFKA_PORT_2181_TCP_ADDR – A zookeeper node listening on port 2181. This environ‑
ment variable is typically set by linking a container running zipkin-kafka as “kafka” when
you start the container.
For example, to add debug logging, set JAVA_OPTS as shown in our docker‑compose file:
1 - JAVA_OPTS=-Dlogging.level.zipkin=DEBUG -Dlogging.level.zipkin2=
DEBUG
Runtime user
The openzipkin/zipkin and openzipkin/zipkin-slim images run under a nologin user
named ‘zipkin’ with a home directory of ‘/zipkin’. As this is a distroless image, you won’t find many
utilities installed, but you can browse contents with a shell like below:
1 $ docker run -it --rm --entrypoint /busybox/sh openzipkin/zipkin
2 /zipkin $ ls
3 BOOT-INF META-INF org run.sh
2

| 1 - JAVA_OPTS=-Dlogging.level.zipkin=DEBUG -Dlogging.level.zipkin2=   |
|:----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| DEBUG                                                                 |

| 1 $ docker run -it --rm --entrypoint /busybox/sh openzipkin/zipkin   |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2 /zipkin $ ls                                                       |
| 3 BOOT-INF META-INF org run.sh                                       |

docker‑compose
This project is configured to run docker containers using docker‑compose. Note that the default con‑
figuration requires docker‑compose 1.6.0+ and docker‑engine 1.10.0+.
To start the default docker‑compose configuration, run:
1 $ docker-compose up
View the web UI at $(docker ip):9411.
ToseespecifictracesintheUI,select“zipkin‑server”inthedropdownandthenclickthe“FindTraces”
button.
Slim
To start a smaller and faster distribution of zipkin, run:
1 $ docker-compose -f docker-compose-slim.yml up
This starts in‑memory storage. The only other supported option for slim is Elasticsearch:
1 $ docker-compose -f docker-compose-slim.yml -f docker-compose-
elasticsearch.yml up
MySQL
The default docker‑compose configuration defined in docker-compose.yml is backed by MySQL.
This configuration starts zipkin, zipkin-mysql and zipkin-dependencies (cron job) in
their own containers.
Cassandra
The docker‑compose configuration can be extended to use Cassandra instead of MySQL, using the
docker-compose-cassandra.yml file. That file employs docker‑compose overrides to swap
out one storage container for another.
To start the Cassandra‑backed configuration, run:
1 $ docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose-cassandra.yml
up
3

| 1 $ docker-compose -f docker-compose-slim.yml -f docker-compose-   |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| elasticsearch.yml up                                               |

| 1 $ docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose-cassandra.yml   |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| up                                                                         |

Elasticsearch
The docker‑compose configuration can be extended to use Elasticsearch instead of MySQL, using the
docker-compose-elasticsearch.yml file. That file employs docker‑compose overrides to
swap out one storage container for another.
To start the Elasticsearch‑backed configuration, run:
1 $ docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose-elasticsearch.
yml up
Elasticsearch5+andHostsetup Thezipkin-elasticsearch5andzipkin-elasticsearch6
images are more strict about virtual memory. You will need to adjust accordingly (especially if you
notice elasticsearch crash!)
1 # If docker is running on your host machine, adjust the kernel setting
directly
2 $ sudo sysctl -w vm.max_map_count=262144
3
4 # If using docker-machine/Docker Toolbox/Boot2Docker, remotely adjust
the same
5 $ docker-machine ssh default "sudo sysctl -w vm.max_map_count=262144"
Kafka
Thedocker‑composeconfigurationcanbeextendedtohostatestKafkabrokerandactivatetheKafka
collector using the docker-compose-kafka.yml file. That file employs docker‑compose over‑
rides to add a Kafka+ZooKeeper container and relevant settings.
To start the MySQL+Kafka configuration, run:
1 $ docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose-kafka.yml up
ThenconfiguretheKafkasenderusingabootstrapServersvalueofhost.docker.internal
:9092 if your application is inside the same docker network or localhost:19092 if not, but run‑
ning on the same host.
In other words, if you are running a sample application on your laptop, you would use localhost
:19092 bootstrap server to send spans to the Kafka broker running in Docker.
4

| 1 $ docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose-elasticsearch.   |
|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| yml up                                                                      |

| 1 # If docker is running on your host machine, adjust the kernel setting   |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| directly                                                                   |
| 2 $ sudo sysctl -w vm.max_map_count=262144                                 |
| 3                                                                          |
| 4 # If using docker-machine/Docker Toolbox/Boot2Docker, remotely adjust    |
| the same                                                                   |
| 5 $ docker-machine ssh default "sudo sysctl -w vm.max_map_count=262144"    |

UI
The docker‑compose configuration can be extended to host the UI on port 80 using the docker-
compose-ui.ymlfile. Thatfileemploysdocker‑composeoverridestoaddanNGINXcontainerand
relevant settings.
To start the NGINX configuration, run:
1 $ docker-compose -f docker-compose.yml -f docker-compose-ui.yml up
This container doubles as a skeleton for creating proxy configuration around Zipkin like authentica‑
tion, dealing with CORS with zipkin‑js apps, or terminating SSL.
Prometheus
Zipkin comes with a built‑in Prometheus metric exporter. The main docker-compose.
yml file starts Prometheus configured to scrape Zipkin, exposes it on port 9090. You can
open $DOCKER_HOST_IP:9090 and start exploring the metrics (which are available on the
/prometheus endpoint of Zipkin).
docker-compose.yml also starts a Grafana container with authentication disabled, exposing it
onport3000. Onstartupit’sconfiguredwiththePrometheusinstancestartedbydocker-compose
as a data source, and imports the dashboard published at https://grafana.com/dashboards/1598.
This means that, after running docker-compose up, you can open $DOCKER_IP:3000/
dashboard/db/zipkin-prometheus and play around with the dashboard.
If you want to run the zipkin‑ui standalone against a remote zipkin server, you need to set
ZIPKIN_BASE_URL accordingly:
1 $ docker run -d -p 80:80 \
2 -e ZIPKIN_BASE_URL=http://myfavoritezipkin:9411 \
3 openzipkin/zipkin-ui
Legacy
DockermachineandKafka IfyouareusingDockermachine,adjustKAFKA_ADVERTISED_HOST_NAME
in docker-compose-kafka.yml and the bootstrapServers configuration of the kafka
sender to match your Docker host IP (ex. 192.168.99.100:19092).
Notes
If using a provided MySQL server or image, ensure schema and other parameters match the docs.
5

| 1 $ docker run -d -p 80:80 \                        |
|:----------------------------------------------------|
| 2 -e ZIPKIN_BASE_URL=http://myfavoritezipkin:9411 \ |
| 3 openzipkin/zipkin-ui                              |