1
Aperiodic Array Synthesis
for Multi-User MIMO Applications
C. Bencivenni Member, IEEE, A. A. Glazunov Senior Member, IEEE, R. Maaskant, Senior Member, IEEE,
and M. V. Ivashina, Senior Member, IEEE
8102 guA 42  ]PS.ssee[  1v12380.8081:viXra
Abstract—This paper demonstrates the advantages of aperiodic
arrays in multi-user multiple-input multiple-output systems for
future mobile communication applications. We propose a novel
aperiodic array synthesis method which account for the statistics
of the propagation channel and the adaptive beamforming
algorithm. Clear performance gains in line-of-sight dominated
propagation environments are achieved in terms of the signal-to-
h
w
interference-plus-noise ratio, the sum rate capacity, as well as the km
m UE
spread of the amplifier outputpower as compared to their regular k
BS
counterparts. We also show that the performance is not sacrificed
m
in rich scattering environments. Hence, aperiodic array layouts
can provide performance gains in millimeter-wave applications Fig. 1: Illustration of an M × K MU-MIMO system in downlink,
with a dominating line-of-sight component. where M and K are the number of Base Station (BS) antenna
elements and User Equipments (UE), respectively.
Index Terms—aperiodic array, MU-MIMO, massive arrays,
mobile communication.
the desired beamshape nor the element excitations, since these
I. INTRODUCTION
are both channel-state dependent and dynamically adapted to
The continuously growing need for higher capacity and user improve the link quality and/or capacity. Most of the available
data rates in wireless communications calls for new multi- aperiodic array synthesis methods are therefore not suitable or
antenna concepts, such as the massive multiple-input multiple- readily applicable to such beamforming systems.
output (MIMO) concept. The practical implementation of such A recent study found that the array aperiodicity introduced
complex antenna systems is very challenging, particularly if by small random errors in the antenna element placement
power-efficient and cost-effective solutions are to be realized. can be beneficial for the performance of massive multi-user
Typical systems require hundreds up to thousands of active (MU) MIMO communication systems [4]. However, to fully
antenna elements, each of which is equipped with a signal understand its advantages, it is necessary to examine and
digitizing circuit [1]. synthesize optimal aperiodic array layouts. To the best of the
Research on massive MIMO solutions has mainly focused author’s knowledge, this it the first time that aperiodic array
on classical uniform array layouts. However, aperiodic array synthesis is proposed and studied in this context.
layouts are potentially advantageous in suppressing spatially This paper introduces an innovative deterministic-statistical
distributed interference through minimizing side-lobe levels approach for the synthesis of optimal aperiodic array antennas
while maximizing the power efficiency of amplifiers through as base stations for MU-MIMO applications. We first derive
the use of isophoric array architectures. These advantages have the statistical distribution of the element excitations for a
been exploited in cases where the desired beamshape is known dense regular array for a preselected adaptive beamforming
a priori, including satellite communication and radio astron- algorithm and propagation environment, which is then used as
omy applications [2], [3]. In MIMO systems, adaptive beam- a density taper [5] to identify a reduced set of optimal array
forming is employed, thus there is no a priori knowledge on element locations. This paper presents: (i) a mathematical
formulation of the proposed approach, and; (ii) numerical
C. Bencivenni, A. A. Glazunov, R. Maaskant, and M. V. Ivashina
results illustrating the effects of different propagation environ-
are with the Signals and Systems Department of the Chalmers
ments, as well as the number of base station antenna elements
University of Technology, Go¨teborg, Sweden; R. Maaskant is also
with the Electromagnetics Group of the Eindhoven University of and users, on the the performance improvements of aperiodic
Technology, the Netherlands, e-mail: carlo.bencivenni@chalmers.se, an-
arrays over regular ones. For these comparisons we employ
dres.glazunov@chalmers.se, rob.maaskant@chalmers.se/r.maaskant@tue.nl,
the Zero Forcing adaptive beamformer.
marianna.ivashina@chalmers.se.
This work is financed by the Swedish VINNOVA Excellence Research
Center Chase/ChaseOn, and by part by the Netherlands Institute for Scientific
Research NWO VIDI grants. II. MU-MIMO SYSTEM MODEL
Manuscript submitted to IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag. on March 18,
2017; published and defended as part of the PhD dissertation Aperiodic In the following subsections we introduce: 1) the MU-
ArraySynthesis for Telecommunications on May 31, 2017, Go¨teborg, Sweden,
MIMO antenna system model for the downlink scenario; 2) the
candidate: Carlo Bencivenni, Chalmers University of Technology, faculty
opponent: Andrea Massa, ELEDIA center. radio propagation channel model; 3) the key communication

2
link performance metrics, employed to evaluate system per- Array aperture
formance such as the SINR and sum-rate capacity, and; 4) the Regular array (densely sampled)
figures of merit to evaluate power level variations of amplifiers
due to adaptive beamforming. Finally, in 5), the uplink duality
Environment: {K}
is briefly outlined.
Statistical analysis
1) Downlink: Consider the downlink of an M K single-
Assumed:
×
cell narrowband MU-MIMO system, as shown in Fig. 1. The
  - Beamforming algorithm
BS is equipped with M antennas serving K single-antenna   - Scattering enviroment
CM×1
UEs (User Equipments), with M K. Let x be the
≥ ∈ μ
signal transmitted from the BS array with normalized power
Array layout: {M}
2 CK×1
x = 1. The received signal y at the K UEs can
|| || ∈ Density taper synthesis
be expressed as
y = √SNRHx + n, (1) )x( µ noitubirtsid derised
I
where SNR is the average per-user signal-to-noise ratio (SNR),
H CK×M is the downlink MU-MIMO channel matrix and )x( i
∈ CK×1
n is the additive white Gaussian noise at the users,
∈ Regular
here assumed having zero-mean and unit variance.
Aperiodic
2) Channel Model: The channel matrix H captures the
radio propagation conditions between the antenna ports of the
x
BS and that of the multiple UEs. In our model, the BS antenna
x=[x , x ... x ]
is a linear array of M Huygens sources serving K UEs in a
1 2  M
120◦ cell sector. Each UE is represented by a linearly polarized
Aperiodic array
antenna with a random orientation and position, see Fig. 1.
The MIMO system can be characterized in two extreme
propagation environments: (i) the Rich Isotropic MultiPath Fig. 2: Illustration of the proposed dual-step aperiodic array design
procedure, as described in Sec. III-1.
(RIMP) environment [6], with a very large number of random
uniformly distributed scattered waves, and; (ii) the Random
Line of Sight (RLOS) environment [7], with a single direct
The ergodic sum rate capacity of the total MU-MIMO
wave with random properties due to arbitrary position and ori-
system is then defined as [9]
entation of the UE. To characterize these, as well as in-between
environments, the problem was modeled by associating to each K
SR = E[log (1 + SINR )]. (3)
UE a set of waves (from 1 for RLOS up to 20 for RIMP) with 2 k
X
k=1
a uniform random distribution in angle of arrival, amplitude,
phase and polarization. Note that each wave thus represents 4) Amplifier Output Power Levels: The pre-coding matrix
either the LOS component or a strong scatterer. Simulations W is changed adaptively in time as it depends on H, and
are repeated 106 times to produce accurate statistics, such as thus different BS antenna excitation coefficients x are obtained
the cumulative probability distribution (CDFs), the average at every time instant for each UE. Therefore, to study the
and the variance. statistics of the amplifier output power levels we introduce
3) SINR and Sum Rate Capacity: We assume perfect chan- 2 2
K K
nel state information at the transmitter, so that H is known µ = E (cid:12) W (cid:12)  ; σ2 = Var (cid:12) W (cid:12)  (4)
(cid:12) :,k(cid:12) (cid:12) :,k(cid:12)
X X
at the BS. In linear precoding, the transmitted signal can (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)
 (cid:12)k=1   (cid:12)k=1 
(cid:12) (cid:12)
then be expressed as x = √βWq, where W CM×K is (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)
CK×1 intended∈ where µ and σ are the vectors describing the average power
the precoding matrix, q is the transmitted
† ∈ and its variance for each PA (power amplifier), when transmit-
signal, β = 1/tr(WW ) is the power normalization constant,
ting to all users at the same time. When transmitting to one
and † denotes the conjugate transpose operation.
user only at a time instead, the above expressions reduce to
Since we expect an interference-limited scenario, a Zero
2 2 2
µ = E[ W ] and σ = Var[ W ], however identical
:,k :,k
Forcing (ZF) beamformer is assumed to suppress the interfer- k k
| | | |
distribution are found in both scenarios. We define the power
H† (HH† )−1
ence between UEs. Accordingly, W = .
spread as
The downlink signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR)
2 2
of the kth user can be expressed as [8] PS = max(µ + σ )/min(µ σ ) (5)
−
2
βSNR H W where PS=0dB represents the ideal constant and uniform
k,: :,k
SINR = | | (2)
k βSNR K H W 2 + 1 power level for all PAs, while larger values indicate a stronger
j6=k k,: :,j
P | | variation of the excitations across the array and/or channel
where X and X indicate the ith row and jth column of realizations. In practice, in the downlink scenario, PAs are
i,: :,j
the matrix X, respectively. It is worthwhile to note that Eq (2) deployed at each of the BS antenna ports to provide the
is valid for any pre-coding matrix. desired radiated power. Solid state PAs are designed for a fixed

|    |    |    | None   |    |    | None   |    | None   |    | None   | None   |
|:---|:---|:---|:-------|:---|:---|:-------|:---|:-------|:---|:-------|:-------|
|    |    |    |        |    |    |        |    |        | R  | egula  | r      |
|    |    |    |        |    |    |        |    |        |    |        | dic    |
|    |    |    |        |    |    |        |    |        | A  | perio  |        |

3
maximum output power and typically operate most efficiently -4 x [ ] 4
0
10
at saturation [10]. It is thus desirable to have all power
amplifiers operating at a uniform power level (thus lower PS
Array layout
values), but this is difficult to reach due to the high degree of
adaptivity of MIMO systems.
-1
10
5) Uplink: Similar expressions to (1) apply to the uplink ]-[ FDC]-[ FDC
  5%
CM×1
scenario, where y is the received signal at the BS
CK×1 ∈ Regular
and x is the signal transmitted from the UEs. The
Aperiodic
∈ -2
decoded signal can instead be expressed as ˜y = Dy, where D 10 SINRG=3dB 1 wave-RLOS
2 waves
is the decoding matrix. The SINR expression (2) is modified
5 waves
by the asymmetry of the link, however the SR expression (3) 10 waves
20 waves-RIMP
is the same as the one for the uplink. We refer, e.g., to [11]
-3
10
for a more complete formulation. -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10
SINR [dB]
Fig. 3: Uplink Cumulative Distribution Functions (CDFs) of SINR
III. DESIGN METHODOLOGY
for an 8 × 2 MU-MIMO system operating in different propagation
environments, which are modeled by a number of incoming plane
In the following we propose a novel design approach to the
waves, one per UE. For all propagation cases SNR=0dB and the
synthesis of aperiodic arrays tailored to the MU-MIMO type
results are shown for the regular (solid lines) and optimized aperiodic
scenario. (dashed lines) array antennas (see the layout inset).
1) Aperiodic array design: The newly proposed synthesis
method is based on a combined statistical analysis and a
0
density taper approach, where the knowledge of the statistical 10
Regular
distribution of the excitations is used to determine the optimal
Aperiodic
array layout, see Fig. 2. Firstly, we densely sample the desired Downlink
Uplink
aperture with a regular array of Huygens sources to repre-
-1
10
sent a generic aperture field distribution. Then, we simulate
the dense array in the desired propagation environment, as
described in Section II-2, and compute the resulting average
powers µ [see (4)] of these array elements. This will form 10-2
our reference power distribution. Subsequently, the aperiodic
layout is synthesized through the density taper approach [5],
i.e., elements are located with a density proportional to the
-3
10
reference power distribution. Mathematically, the antenna po-
-80 -60 -40 -20 0 20
sitions are obtained as SINR [dB]
1)∆I)−1 Fig. 4: Uplink and Downlink CDFs of SINRs at SNR=0dB for an
x = i((m m = 1,...M (6)
m 8 × 2 MU-MIMO system, in the Random Line-Of-Sight (RLOS)
−
propagation environment.
x
where i(x) = µ(τ)dτ is the auxiliary cumulative distribu-
0
R
tion derived from µ(x) : [0,X ], ∆I = i(X )/(M 1)
max max
i−1 operation−
is its equipartition and denotes the inverse . As
Similarly, regarding the amplifier output powers, the Power
shown in Fig. 2, starting from the reference distribution µ(x),
Spread Compression (PSC) is defined as the power spread
the antenna positions are easily found as the intersection points
difference between the two arrays, i.e.,
between i(x) and its equipartitions.
PSC = [PSregular /PSaperiodic ]. (8)
2) Aperiodic array gains: For the assessment of the per-
formance of the aperiodic array, all results are presented in
Both the SINRG and the PSC are positive (in dB) when the
comparison with the respective uniform array, having the same
aperiodic array outperforms the regular one.
aperture, antenna type and total number of antenna elements.
Besides individual performance curves, relative gain curves
IV. RESULTS
are plotted to indicate the improvement of the aperiodic over
In the following we discuss: 1) the effect of the propagation
the regular array. For instance, in terms of the link quality, the
environment, 2) the uplink/downlink duality, 3) the impact
SINR Gain (SINRG) is introduced,
of the aperiodic layout on the SINR and the SR, as well
SINRG = [SINRaperiodic /SINRregular ]SNR=0dB (7) as 4) on the amplifier output powers. Different systems are
CDF=5%
compared, whose sizes range from 8 2 up to 16 8 (M K),
× × ×
as the SINR difference between the two arrays for an SNR and where the solid and dashed curves are for the regular
of 0dB evaluated at the 5% level of the CDF (i.e. for 95% of and aperiodic array case, respectively. In all cases the array
the users). The same SINRG is obtained for each of the UE aperture is (M 1)λ. The SINR CDF, Eq. (2), and the SR,
−
streams due to the random nature of the scenario. Eq. (3), are used to discuss the link reliability and the capacity,

|    |    |    |            | None   | None   |    |    |    |       | None   |    |          | None   |
|:---|:---|:---|:-----------|:-------|:-------|:---|:---|:---|:------|:-------|:---|:---------|:-------|
|    |    |    | Array layo |        |        |    | ut |    |       |        |    |          |        |
|    |    |    |            |        |        |    |    |    |       | Regul  |    | ar       |        |
| SI |    |    |            |        |        |    |    |    |       | Aperi  |    | odic     |        |
|    |    |    |            |        |        |    |    |    |       | 1 wav  |    | e-RLOS   |        |
|    |    |    |            |        |        |    |    |    |       | 2 wav  |    | es       |        |
|    |    |    |            |        |        |    |    |    |       | 5 wav  |    | es       |        |
|    |    |    |            |        |        |    |    |    |       | 10 wa  |    | ves      |        |
|    |    |    |            |        |        |    |    |    | 20 wa | 20 wa  |    | ves-RIMP |        |

|        | Regul   | ar   |    |    |    |    |
|:-------|:--------|:-----|:---|:---|:---|:---|
|        |         |      |    |    |    |    |
|        | Aperi   | odic |    |    |    |    |
|        | Down    | link |    |    |    |    |
| Uplink | Uplink  |      |    |    |    |    |
|        |         |      |    |    |    |    |
|        |         |      |    |    |    |    |
|        |         |      |    |    |    |    |
|        |         |      |    |    |    |    |
|        |         |      |    |    |    |    |
|        |         |      |    |    |    |    |
|        |         |      |    |    |    |    |
|        |         |      |    |    |    |    |
|        |         |      |    |    |    |    |
|        |         |      |    |    |    |    |

4
]Bd[ ) ( rewop egareva dezilamroN]W[ ) ( ecnairav rewoP 4.4dB
100 3
Regular
BSx2; UEx4
Aperiodic
2 8x2
16x2
-1 16x4 1.6dB
10
1 16x8
]-[ FDC]zH/s/tib[ RS
; U E x 2   5%
B S x 2
minim al 0
Regular
-2
10 Aperiodic
8x2
B S x 2 16x2 -1
16x4
16x8
10-3 -2
-40 -30 -20 -10 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
SINR [dB] Antenna [#]
Fig. 5: Uplink CDFs of SINR at SNR=0dB for different MU-MIMO Fig. 7: Amplifier’s normalized average output power levels for
different MU-MIMO system sizes, in the RLOS environment.
system sizes, in the RLOS environment.
-3
10
50 12
+12% 0.105 Regular
Regular Aperiodic
Aperiodic 22 8x2
10
40 8x2 16x2
16x2 16x4
16x4 8 16x8
30 16x8
+5%
6 0.005
20
+0.8% 4
10
2
+1.5%
0
-10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
SNR [dB] Antenna [#]
Fig. 6: Uplink Sum Rate (SR) for different MU-MIMO system sizes, Fig. 8: Amplifier’s power variance for MU-MIMO of different
in the RLOS environment. system sizes, in RLOS.
respectively. Finally, in 5), large scale massive MIMO systems different due to the different SINR expressions, the aperiodic
are examined in terms of the relative gains as defined in SINR gain is evidently present and of comparable value in
Sec. III-2. both cases. Regarding the antenna excitations, identical power
1) LOS- to RIMP-dominated environments: We study scat- profiles µ(x) are found, which is due to the pre- and de-coding
tering effects by changing the number of plane waves associ- matrices, one being the Hermitian of the other. However, the
ated with each UE (see Sec. II-2). Fig. 3 compares the SINR efficiencies of the low-noise amplifiers in the receive mode are
CDFs for an 8 2 aperiodic and regular array, when moving not as important as those for the PAs in the transmit case. Note
×
from an RLOS- to RIMP-dominated environment. Note that that, in the uplink scenario: (i) the CDF shows directly the
in all SINR CDF plots, rightmost and steepest curves are required transmitted power for a minimum SINR to a certain
preferred since then higher SINR values are more probable. user percentile, and; (ii), the SINR CDF curves are linearly
For RLOS (1 random wave per UE), the aperiodic array dependent on the SNR [12]. We thus choose to show the rest
offers the largest gain (SINRG=3dB), while it progressively of the SINR results only for the uplink scenario and for one
reduces for increasing scattering until the two curves overlap SNR only.
for the RIMP environment (10-20 random waves per UE); 3) SINR and Capacity: As shown above, aperiodic arrays
Thus the aperiodic array always exhibits superior or identical can improvethe SINR ratio, and thus the capacity too. In Fig. 5
SINRG performance. Evidently, the RLOS environment is the the SINR CDFs for the aperiodic and regular arrays of different
most favorable propagation condition for aperiodic arrays and system sizes are compared. Starting from the 8 2 system
×
therefore considered in the remainder of the paper. (SINRG=3dB), if we double the number of BS antennas, but
2) Uplink and Downlink: Similar conclusions are valid for keep the number of UEs the same, the SINR CDF improves
downlink and uplink when it comes to the SINR gain. To show (i.e. moves to the right) as expected. However, the SINRG
this, the CDFs of the aperiodic and regular arrays in the two decreases to 1dB. If, on the other hand, the number of UEs
scenarios are plotted in Fig. 4. Although the distributions are is also doubled, and thus the ratio of the number of BS-to-

|         |       |      | None   |           | None   |
|:--------|:------|:-----|:-------|:----------|:-------|
|         |       |      |        | UEx4      |        |
|         |       | BSx  |        | 2;        |        |
| minimal | BSx2; | UEx2 |        | Regular   |        |
| BS      | x2    |      |        | Aperiodic |        |
|         |       |      |        | 8x2       |        |
|         |       |      |        | 16x2      |        |
|         |       |      |        | 16x4      |        |
|         |       |      |        | 16x8      |        |

|    |    |    |    |    |    | R   | egu   | lar    | c   |    |    |    |      | None   |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    | A   | per   | iodi   |     |    |    |    |      |        |    |    |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:----|:------|:-------|:----|:---|:---|:---|:-----|:-------|:---|:---|
|    |    |    |    |    |    | 8   | x2    |        |     |    |    |    | 1.6d |        | B  |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    | 1   | 6x2   |        |     |    |    |    |      |        |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    | 1   | 6x4   |        |     |    |    |    |      |        |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    | 1   | 6x8   |        |     |    |    |    |      |        |    |    |

|     | None   |        | None   |    |       |       |     |
|:----|:-------|:-------|:-------|:---|:------|:------|:----|
|     | Reg    | ular   |        |    |       |       |     |
|     | Ape    | riodic |        |    |       |       |     |
|     | 8x2    |        |        |    |       |       |     |
|     | 16x    | 2      |        |    |       |       |     |
|     | 16x    | 4      |        |    |       |       |     |
| 16x |        | 8      |        |    |       |       | +5% |
|     |        |        |        |    |       | +0.8% |     |
|     |        |        |        |    | +1.5% |       |     |

|    | 0   | .10   | None   | 5   | None   |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | Re   | gul    | ar    |
|    |     |       |        |     |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | Ap   | erio   | dic   |
|:---|:----|:------|:-------|:----|:-------|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:-----|:-------|:------|
|    |     |       |        |     |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 8x   | 2      |       |
|    |     |       |        |     |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 16   | x2     |       |
|    |     |       |        |     |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 16   | x4     |       |
|    |     |       |        |     |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 16   | x8     |       |
|    |     |       | 0      | .00 |        | 5  |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |      |        |       |

5
128 60 128 5
55 1 01 0 533003 54 04 04 5 5 0 5 0 565 004 54 03 54 03 0 5023 502 012501 051 0351 6400 1 2 2 0-1
3 2 02
64 1 1 5 20 5 50 1 4
]#[ sannetna SB 32 5 55 1 01100 25303 33 0 053 544 040045 50 5 0 555 0 4 55 04 04 5 003 533 002 5 40 ]Bd[ GRNIS ]#[ sannetna SB 320 0]Bd[ CSP 1 2 2 - 01 21 5-01 3
3 202025
16 15 12 50 45 30 16 1 2
344 505
1 34 54 00
11 100 23 530 230 50 20 2
8 0 8 1
20 1
2020
15
55 5 15 1
0 10 10
4 0 3 10 4 0
5 55 1
1 3
0
1
2 2 0 -1
10 30 50 70 90 10 30 50 70 90
UEs [% of BS antennas] UEs [% of BS antennas]
Fig. 9: Aperiodic array gain as function of BS antennas and cell Fig. 10: Power spread compression as function of BS antennas and
crowdedness (number of UE as % of BS antennas). cell crowdedness (number of UE as % of BS antennas).
UE antennas is kept constant, not only the CDFs improve than 15dB at 30%, while having a PSC between 1 to 3dB.
but also the SINRG increases to 3.5dB. Finally, if the UEs
are further doubled, the SINRG exceeds 10dB: note how the
V. CONCLUSIONS
16 8 aperiodic array provides approximately the same per-
× In this manuscript we have investigated the advantages
user SINR of the 8 2 array, where the regular array case
× of aperiodic arrays for MU-MIMO applications. We have
would instead lose 10dB.
introduced a simple aperiodic design method based on a hybrid
Fig. 6 shows the SR capacities corresponding to the same
statistical-density tapering approach. We have then considered
array configurations as shown in Fig. 5. The system capacity
the effects on: (i) the link performance, and; (ii) the amplifier
increases with both the number of BS antennas and the number
power spread with respect to classical regular arrays.
of UE, with the 16 8 aperiodic array having a 12% rate
× Results show that aperiodic MU-MIMO arrays provide the
increase over the regular. That is, both the user’s 5-percentile
largest gains in line-of-sight dominated environments. This
SINR improves (which condition the link budget), as well as
reduces for increasing degree of scattering, however they are
the capacity in more crowded scenarios.
never inferior to the regular arrays. This can be concluded in
4) Amplifier power: Fig. 7 shows the normalized average
both the up and downlink case. Aperiodic arrays are shown
antenna output powers of the regular and aperiodic arrays
to be beneficial to the link performance, both to the users’ 5
that were considered above. For the regular array, increasing
percentile SINR as well as the sum rate capacity. Moreover,the
the BS antennas and the UE-to-BS ratio exacerbates the
aperiodic layout improves the amplifiers efficiency owing to a
power unbalance between the edge and central elements. The
more uniform average power among the antenna’s power am-
aperiodic array, on the other hand, exhibits a more uniform
plifiers. Even for a relatively small 16 8 MU-MIMO system,
average port power among the elements: the 16 8 aperiodic
×
× it is possible to achieve a 10dB power budget improvement, a
array has a 2.8dB tapering reduction.
12% capacity increase and a 3dB amplifier tapering reduction.
A similar trend is observed for the variance in antenna port
Finally, it is shown that larger and more crowded MU-MIMO
powers as shown in Fig. 8. Here too, the highest variance is
systems benefit most by the array aperiodicity. Results show
associated with the edge elements, irrespective of the system
that aperiodic arrays can provide a substantial gain in the
size. The aperiodic array reduces the variance, albeit to a lesser
link quality and capacity, especially in scenarios with large
extent for the central elements; hence, aperiodicity is mostly
interference.
beneficial in ensuring a uniform average power allocation.
5) Massive MU-MIMO: The link quality (SINR) and the
power spread of PAs are strongly dependent on the system REFERENCES
size. It is therefore relevant to study the impact of the massive
[1] F. Rusek, D. Persson, B. K. Lau, E. G. Larsson, T. L. Marzetta,
MIMO architecture on the SINRG and the PSC figures-of- O. Edfors, and F. Tufvesson, “Scaling up MIMO: Opportunities and
merit. Fig. 9 shows the SINRG as a function of the number challenges with very large arrays,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30,
no. 1, pp. 40–60, Jan 2013.
of BS antennas and cell crowdedness, i.e., the number of
[2] C. Bencivenni, M. V. Ivashina, R. Maaskant, and J. Wettergren, “Synthe-
UEs as a percentage of the BS antennas (K/M 100). In sis of maximally sparse arrays using compressive sensing and full-wave
∗
Fig. 10 the PSC is shown as well. In general, the SINRG analysis for global earth coverage applications,” IEEE Trans. Antennas
Propag., vol. 64, no. 11, pp. 4872–4877, Nov 2016.
can be very substantial, particularly in crowded cells and
[3] W. van Cappellen, S. J. Wijnholds, and J. D. Bregman, “Sparse antenna
for a large number of BS antennas. The PSC, on the other array configurations in large aperture synthesis radio telescopes,” in 2006
hand, demonstrates more moderate gains. As an example: a European Radar Conference, Sep 2006, pp. 76–79.
[4] X. Ge, R. Zi, H. Wang, J. Zhang, and M. Jo, “Multi-user massive MIMO
moderately large aperiodic system of 64 BS antennas would
communication systems based on irregular antenna arrays,” IEEE Trans.
experience an SINR increase of 3dB at 10% UEs, and more Wireless Commun., vol. 15, no. 8, pp. 5287–5301, Aug 2016.

|    | 35   | None   | 5   | 10   | 10     |   15220025 | 3300354040   | 45 50           |    | 50 5045403540   | None       | None   | 30235020125010510351   |
|    | 1    |        |     |      |        |            |              |                 |    | 565             |            |        | 0                      |
|    |      |        |     |      |        |            |              |                 |    | 0               |            |        |                        |
|:---|:-----|:-------|:----|:-----|:-------|-----------:|:-------------|:----------------|:---|:----------------|:-----------|:-------|:-----------------------|
|    |      |        | 5   | 5    | 101100 |            |              | 5               |    | 0 50 55         |            |        | 5 4 55 040403533 00    |
|    |      |        |     |      |        |            |              | 33353544 040045 |    |                 |            |        |                        |
|    |      |        | 5   |      | 1      |            |              | 25030           |    | 50 50           |            |        |                        |
|    |      |        | 3   |      |        |            |              | 0               |    | 45              |            |        |                        |
|    |      |        |     |      |        |            |              | 202025          |    |                 |            |        |                        |
|    |      |        |     |      |        |            |              | 20              |    |                 |            |        |                        |
|    |      | 1      |     |      |        |          5 |              | 15              |    |                 |            |        | 33 304 354 0344 0 00 5 |
|    |      |        |     |      |        |            |              | 11 100          |    |                 |            |        | 252                    |
| 0  |      |        |     |      |        |            |              | 0               |    |                 | 12 5200205 |        |                        |
|    |      |        |     |      |        |            |              | 555             |    |                 | 15         |        |                        |
|    |      |        |     |      |        |            |              | 3               |    |                 | 1          |        |                        |
|    |      |        |     |      |        |            |              |                 |    |                 | 1          |        |                        |
|    |      | 0      |     |      |        |            |              | 1               |    |                 |            | 5      |                        |
|    |      |        |     |      |        |            |              |                 |    |                 |            | 5      |                        |
|    |      |        |     |      |        |            |              |                 |    |                 |            | 3      |                        |
|    |      |        |     |      |        |            |              |                 |    |                 |            | 1      |                        |

| 0   | 1   |    | 2   |   None | 2 0   |   None | None   | -1      | None   | None   | None   |
|     |     |    |     |        | 1     |        |        | -1      |        |        |        |
|     |     |    |     |        |       |        |        | 21-01   |        |        |        |
|     |     |    |     |        |       |        |        | 0       |        |        |        |
|:----|:----|:---|:----|-------:|:------|-------:|:-------|:--------|:-------|:-------|:-------|
| 0   | 1 2 |    |     |        |       |        | 2      |         |        |        |        |
|     |     |    |     |        |       |        |        |         | 1      |        | 5      |
|     |     |    |     |      2 |       |        |        |         |        |        |        |
|     |     |    | 1   |        |       |        |        |         | 1      |        |        |
| 0   |     |    |     |        |       |      1 |        |         |        |        |        |

6
[5] P. Angeletti and G. Toso, “Array antennas with jointly optimized
elements positions and dimensions part I: Linear arrays,” IEEE Trans.
Antennas Propag., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1619–1626, April 2014.
[6] U. Carlberg, J. Carlsson, A. Hussain, and P. S. Kildal, “Ray based
multipath simulation tool for studying convergence and estimating
ergodic capacity and diversity gain for antennas with given far-field
functions,” in ICECom, 2010 Conference Proceedings, Sep 2010, pp.
1–4.
[7] P.-S. Kildal, U. Carlberg, and J. Carlsson, “Definition of antenna
diversity gain in user-distributed 3D-random line-of-sight,” Journal of
Electromagnetic Engineering and Science (JEES), vol. 13, no. 2, pp.
86–92, 2013.
[8] H. Sifaou, A. Kammoun, L. Sanguinetti, M. Debbah, and M. S. Alouini,
“Max-min SINR in large-scale single-cell MU-MIMO: Asymptotic
analysis and low-complexity transceivers,” IEEE Transactions on Signal
Processing, vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 1841–1854, 2017.
[9] A. A. Glazunov, “Downlink massive MIMO performance of a vertically
polarized uniform linear array in random line-of-sight,” in European
Conference on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP), April 2016, pp.
1–4.
[10] D. Persson, T. Eriksson, and E. G. Larsson, “Amplifier-aware multiple-
input single-output capacity,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 3, pp.
913–919, Mar 2014.
[11] H. Q. Ngo, Ed., Massive MIMO: Fundamentals and System Designs.
Linkping, Sweden: Linkoping University Electronic Press, 2015.
[12] X. Chen, “Throughput modeling and measurement in an isotropic-
scattering reverberation chamber,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag.,
vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 2130–2139, April 2014.