ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
Cultural diversity: National culture and its impact on 
motivation 
 
Tomasz Bronisław Czapran * 1 A 
*Corresponding author: 1 Ph.D., e-mail: ibritchenko@gmail.com 
A College of Economics and Computer Science, Krakow, Poland 
Received: September 5, 2022 | Revised: September 25, 2022 | Accepted: September 30, 2022 
DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.7128966 
Abstract 
One of the important factors affecting the organisation culture is the national culture of a country 
in which the company operates. Nation’s culture can be defined as values, expectations and 
behaviours learned and shared by a group of people, passed down from generation to generation. 
National culture impacts organisation’s standards and values. And furthermore, national culture 
significantly affects also its business relations and employee motivation. 
Organisations and society have become increasingly more globalised and multicultural. It is 
common that the workplace involves more than one culture (Winch, 2015, p. 85). Since this article 
involves Asian, American and European companies, the three cultures are selected as the focus. 
Yet,  still  the  companies’  operations,  financial  results  and  workers’  motivation  are  strongly 
influenced by national cultures of the countries in which the organizations are active. 
The article aims to specify what is the role of diversity management and how much influence the 
national culture can have on the employee motivation and business processes in multicultural 
companies on the example of chosen European, American and Asian companies. Therefore, in 
this  article  it  has  been  tried  to  establish  the  differences  in  management  of  international 
corporations  and  the  influence  of  European,  American  and  Asian  culture  on  the  particular 
company.  The  practical  objective  of  this  article,  however,  is  to  examine  a  degree  to  which 
management  based  on  culture  should  be  implemented  and  to  demonstrate  a  change  in  the 
importance of the intercultural diversity.  
For the purpose of the research the standardized and formalized questionnaire has been prepared. 
The questions were mainly closed questions, there was also one open question. From the analysis 
of the study it appears that the national culture of the company’s origin country has little influence 
on management and motivation model in the company. 
Key words: culture, impact, motivation, country. 
Introduction
 
The role of motivation in an international company 
In most cases, people may decide about their workload and effort that is put into work (Dębski, 2009, 
p. 67). This is why managers should understand reasons behind employees’ decisions regarding their 
work. A key reason is motivation (Griffin, 2003, p. 28). 
Motivation compromises a range of motives which, in turn, determine human behaviour. 
Specifically, it can be assumed that employees’ motivation is manner of indicating actions directed 
to achieve specific purposes or otherwise, motivation is the power that creates, directs and maintains 
any human behavior (Sajkiewicz, 1999, p. 199). 
Motivation is also referred to as “the internal state of mind and body – needs and reasons 
which encourage a person to take action (Piotrkowski, 2009, p. 138).” 
Motivation is a general concept, which also means such phenomena as intention, willingness, 
desire, wish or interest. All these terms overlap around one common characteristic that entails a 
readiness to move towards specified goals (Davenport, 2007, p. 18). 
11 

| 0                            | 1   | 2   |
|:-----------------------------|:----|:----|
| Tomasz Bronisław Czapran * 1 | A   |     |

| 0                                           | 1   | 2              |
|:--------------------------------------------|:----|:---------------|
| A College of Economics and Computer Science | ,   | Krakow, Poland |

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
The intensity of desire or aspiration depends on individual needs. From the psychological 
standpoint, a need is permanent human characteristic which necessitate meeting certain conditions to 
achieve or maintain particular states or aims. In other words, the need is an internal state that makes 
some  results  of  human  action  seem  more  attractive.  This  is  the  need  that  determines  human 
behaviours. A prerequisite to create a motive is a feeling of discrepancy between the subjective level 
of  meeting  a  need  and  a  desired  situation.  Hence,  has  to  be  stimulated  and  then  a  feeling  of 
discrepancy triggers a motivational tension. Consequently, this tension, that encourages people to act, 
stimulates energy and entrepreneurship. Actions taken due to this motivational tension may meet 
human need and, as a result, reduce the tension (Andrews, 2011, p. 12). 
It  should  also  be  kept  in  mind  that  motivation is  composed  of many  motives.  Thus,  the 
management  strategy  is  important  as  it  leads  to  getting  and  maintaining  motivation  along  with 
creating its suitable systems (Sikora, 2000, p. 8). 
The main essence of motivation in an international company is linking all aspirations and 
needs of an employee with the process of implementing tasks in the company. Borkowska considers 
that motivating employees can be described as encouraging people through incentives to exhibit 
specific behaviours (Borkowska, 2004, p. 63). 
Sometimes there are obstacles in the process of generating motivation. They can occur at the 
stage preceding an activity and, as a result, hinder undertaking it despite an employee’s genuine 
willingness to do so (for example, the lack of appropriate tools), or after an activity (for instance, very 
low remuneration) which prevent totally or partially meeting the need. Obstacles in motivation are 
the main causes of employees’ frustration or dashed hopes.  
Barriers  to  the  process  of motivation  are  one  of the  main  causes  of suffering  caused  by 
frustration and disappointment. For example, frustration occurs when there is an obstacle between 
employees needs and received rewards (Kostera, 2006, p. 82). 
In the process of management, motivational strategies should be based on expectancy theory by 
V.H. Vroom. According to this theory motivation is determined by three factors (Kostera, 2006, p. 92): 
1. Needs, goals – expectations. 
2. Cause-affect relationship that occurs between an effort and a goal. 
3. A probability that specifies whether an activity meets felt needs. 
Before undertaking any activity, an employee should estimate whether the effort put into a 
task is sufficient to complete it. The greater probability of achieving a goal, the greater likelihood of 
taking an action because people tend to expect a result proportional to the effort. It is a prerequisite, 
yet insufficient for generating motivation. What is necessary, is to determine the degree of meeting 
expectations which are implemented as a result of actions taken. These are rational expectations, 
based on the principle of economy of effort. If employees’ preliminary calculation showed that the 
effect would be disproportionately low – they would not be motivated. Thus, employees would not 
be willing to take on the task. Only a positive result of such estimates would generate motivational 
mechanisms. In the first place, knowledge of a specific mechanism, human needs and expectations 
should be found out. It has been noted by McGinnis who formulated one of several methods of getting 
the best of people (Pocztowski, 2007, p. 143). 
Hence, the motivating process is activating employees’ behaviours directed to meeting their 
values and needs and, at the very same time, preparing them to perform actions that enable carrying 
out and meeting the company’s organizational goals (Dębski, 2009, p.33).  
Motivational systems can be divided into two forms: financial and non-financial incentives. 
Financial incentives include: salaries, bonuses, commissions and all sorts of funding. Non-
financial incentives embrace training, abroad internships, career paths building, access to the latest 
technologies and other benefits (Gach, 2007, p. 4). 
The basis of all personal motivation models is to provide potential rewards the intent of which 
is to meet key needs. Each director or manager must be aware that employees are motivated only 
when a potential reward is sufficiently attractive in regards to their needs.  
 
4 

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
Two forms of 
motivational system 
Financial  Non-financial 
incentives  incentives 
 
 
Figure 1 – Motivational system forms 
Source: Own study, based on: Dębski D., Ekonomika i organizacja  
przedsiębiorstw, WSiP, Warszawa 2009. 
 
Each employee sees a prize as an incentive to work more efficiently. A potential prize can be 
financial or non-financial, such as professional training. 
Properly conducted professional training contributes to a high satisfaction among employees. 
Improving  qualifications  and  acquiring  knowledge  positively  affect  employees’  work.  Trainings 
organised in companies frequently concern: 
- dealing with stress, 
- language trainings, 
- technological innovations and new products. 
Many organizations offer diversity training to implement and maintain a culture of diversity 
and inclusion (up to 79%, according to Galvin 2003). Although the specifics of diversity training 
programs can vary widely, they share one common set of goals, which is “to increase knowledge 
about diversity, to improve attitudes about diversity, and to develop diversity skills” (Kulik and 
Roberson 2008). Such training can take the form of online modules, classroom-based training, videos, 
discussions, role-plays, simulations, and exercises (Bendick, Egan, and Lofhjelm 2001); (Pendry, 
Driscoll, Field 2007); (Madera, 2013, p. 125). 
Perhaps this also has to do with considerable benefits for an employer, as his or her employee 
is  self-controlled,  knows  foreign  languages  and  new  products  promoted  by  the  company. 
Unfortunately, trainings are too rare and oftentimes do not meet employees’ needs.  
The basic motivational element is remuneration. Unfortunately, financial motivation system 
in many companies is not that well developed. The situation looks totally different when it comes to 
non-financial motivation. Managers tend to focus on non-financial motivation which is used as a form 
of low earnings compensation. When the system of financial motivation is well developed, employees 
have a wide range of opportunities to learn and achieve professional fulfillment.  
Motivational system can be divided into several key groups (Michalski, 2013, p. 65): 
- company motivation – focuses on rewarding achievements, a sense of responsibility and a 
promotion system, 
- employees’  individual  motivation  –  includes  meeting  individual  needs  of  employees 
including their dreams and hobbies,  
- employees’ mutual motivation – positively affects relations between employees in teams. 
The motivation of employees should take into account the following factors (Michalski, 2013, 
p. 101): 
- employees’ work expectations – motivation must assure employees that their effort will be 
awarded,  
- work purpose – it is essential that employees were made aware of the objectives and tasks 
of the international company, 
- needs and values – it  is important to discover needs and values of employees so  as to 
5 

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
gradually implement them, 
- punishments and rewards – employees must be aware of the fact that their work may be 
rewarded but also punished. 
One of the most important features of human resources management is to support a manager 
in motivating employees (Gick, 1999, p. 58). The employees’ involvement in the operation of a 
company along with their motivation allows for maintaining a competitive advantage in the today's 
market. The processing of the received “gift” and using it to implement actions and achieve objectives 
increases the company’s value.  
For people who are focused on professional success a failure is an experience which is a 
guideline for the future. Because of that managers know how to avoid some difficult situations. It 
should be remembered though, that it requires emotional preparation. Admitting and learning from 
mistakes necessitates self-criticism and it is not easy process. 
Managers in America, Europe and Asia have numerous means of influencing on employees’ 
work involvement which generates and maintains individual motivations. They can be divided into 
two  groups,  namely:  manners  of  encouragement  and  persuasion.  Due  to  their  nature,  today’s 
managers  try  to  encourage  employees  to  use  the  persuasion  i.e.  encouragement  methods.  Their 
potential diversity manifest in multiplicity of classification which is presented in the table below 
(Pocztowski, 2007, p. 156).  
 
Table 1 – Motivational factors classification 
Division criterion  Division 
1.  Type of needs addressed  - Basic incentives address all of the organism needs. 
- Incentives which belong to a higher level include social and moral 
needs and specified forms of addressing basic needs.  
2.  Impact  - Positive (i.e. rewards) undoubtedly strengthens accepted behaviour 
and motivates to achieve greater efficiency at work. 
-  Negative  (i.e.  punishments)  motivates  employees  to  undertake 
activities aimed at avoiding the undesirable behaviours (especially in 
Asia). They work as long as a threat lasts.  
3.  The scope of impact  - Internal – entails implementation of employees’ immanent values 
achieving of which is a value in itself. 
- External, which is directed towards satisfying instrumental values; 
they are only means to implement other values. 
4.  The manner of impact  - Individually. 
- In a team. 
5.  Form  - Financial. 
- Non-financial.  
Source:  Pocztowski,  A.  Zarządzanie  zasobami  ludzkimi:  strategie  –  procesy  –  metody,  Polskie  Wydawnictwo 
Ekonomiczne, Warszawa 2007, p. 156 
Material and methods 
The motivational system construction principles – America, Asia and Europe 
Multinational companies very often try to create motivational systems in such a way as to take into 
account cultural differences. Actions are taken to maximise employees’ motivation.  In the first place, 
companies try to study the impact of a culture on motivational processes. Simultaneously, it needs to 
be considered that the motivational system elements are subject to the cultural impact (Łuka & Sęk, 
2013, p. 65). To make such an analysis, the general scheme of motivation process can be helpful, as 
its shows its basic elements (Lenik, 2012, p. 43): 
- subject of the motivator’s impact, thus motivated – employee, team; 
- motivating subject – employee, supervisor, team, organization; 
- used instrument, tool – motivator; 
6 

| Division criterion      | Division                                                               |
|:------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Type of needs addressed | - Basic incentives address all of the organism needs.                  |
|                         | - Incentives which belong to a higher level include social and moral   |
|                         | needs and specified forms of addressing basic needs.                   |
| Impact                  | - Positive (i.e. rewards) undoubtedly strengthens accepted behaviour   |
|                         | and motivates to achieve greater efficiency at work.                   |
|                         | - Negative (i.e. punishments) motivates employees to undertake         |
|                         | activities aimed at avoiding the undesirable behaviours (especially in |
|                         | Asia). They work as long as a threat lasts.                            |
| The scope of impact     | - Internal – entails implementation of employees’ immanent values      |
|                         | achieving of which is a value in itself.                               |
|                         | - External, which is directed towards satisfying instrumental values;  |
|                         | they are only means to implement other values.                         |
| The manner of impact    | - Individually.                                                        |
|                         | - In a team.                                                           |
| Form                    | - Financial.                                                           |
|                         | - Non-financial.                                                       |

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
- impact process, that is motivating; 
- motivation  result  –  behavior  resulting  from  motivation,  that  is  the  tension  driven  by 
motivation. 
The  overall  scheme  of  motivation  means  that  a  motivator  by  the  means  of  motivations 
generates motivation, that is a type of tension under which an employee behaves in a manner expected 
by  the  motivator  (Glinka,  2011,  p.  56).  The  national  culture’s  impact  embraces  all  mentioned 
elements of the motivational process. Culture consists of the specific values for each country and that 
is the essence of life (Glinka, 2011, p. 56). In one country those are financial means and in other, 
social values related to interp8rsonal relations (Sułkowski, 2010, p. 77). Culture also determines 
standards, rules and principles. They indicate what is prohibited, recommended and acceptable. For 
example, in one culture competitive behaviours are expected while in other, they are perceived as 
egoistical and against the principles of social life. All of this comprises patters of thinking and actions 
in a given country which are also related to work and they may be diverse in different cultures. If an 
international  company  doesn’t  provide  motivational  stimulus  expected  by  employees,  this  could 
cause reluctance and a loss of motivation to work. 
Motivated employees have in fact a culturally programmed idea about the relation between 
them and their boss and what type of behaviours are expected from them. They know what they may 
expect from the employer during their work. Managers also have the standard how to deal with 
employees, for instance, that they should constantly control them. In a different culture, on the other 
hand, close relations between managers and employees’ family are natural.  
The usage, proportions and diversity of motivators used by a company along with expectations 
concerning employees’ activity compromise the company’s motivational system. Depending on the 
type of “culture, various importance is given to specific motivators (financial and non-financial) and 
in various degree they are implemented in the process of the employees motivation. Also expected 
are different behaviours from employees (Sułkowski, 2010, p. 79). 
Work has a specified place in the value system shaped by culture in a given country. Two 
approaches can be observed: work as a value in itself and work as an obligation, necessity. They 
affect in a different way the employee’s motivation level and the necessity of using specific incentives 
in the motivational system. 
Notably, attention should be paid to societies built on the Protestant ethics. In such countries, 
work is considered as a value in itself. Having and doing job is important and determines the human 
value. That is why, ongoing effort, commitment, capital multiplication, investing, economising and 
honesty are highly respected. The socialization process in Protestant families stimulates the need of 
achievements and continuous self-improvement. The Protestant belief is that we do not work to live 
but we live to work. Lack of work is the source of suffering. 
In  America,  working  life  extends  to  the  family  and  social  spheres.  Employees  and  their 
spouses regularly meet on private grounds.  
In Asia, people work long hours and do not take days off. They have active social life. The 
most important decisions are taken after work. They are strongly and emotionally connected with 
their work and co-workers. 
In Germany, the manager-employee contact is artificial and distanced. After-work, meetings 
are  usually  between  colleagues  of the  same  level.  There  are  no  common  lunches,  unless  in  the 
business trips (Sułkowski, 2010, p. 67). In Italy, there is no standard model of social life at work or 
after work. Employees rarely meet or socialize after work. In the United Kingdom, employees of the 
same level usually meet after work in a pub. Common trips, annual events for children, recreational 
meetings are considered as something natural.  
America, Asia and Europe may vary in terms of fixed and variable financial components and 
non-financial  incentives  (Sułkowski,  2010,  p.  70).  Moreover,  there  could  be  changes  in  the 
diversification rates of salaries between positions. 
It should be noted that the process of motivating is very complicated, so there is no guarantee 
that the introduced by the company changes will provide expected results. 
7 

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
The first problem, that is related to the internal salary structure, concerns the method of the 
remuneration calculation for a specific position. In the collectivism, the importance of the individual’s 
effort is minimalized and a half of remuneration compromises the result of the teamwork. The system 
is consistent with Asian and European cultures. 
In individualistic cultures, more attention is put to the individualistic effort and work results 
of each employee. This kind of rewarding system is accepted in such cultures like America. 
The basic remuneration in the form of stable salary, gives the sense of security and confidence. 
The situation in which the basic remuneration comprises the substantial part of the remuneration is 
particularly preferred in cultures of the high level of uncertainty avoidance. These countries of such 
culture include European countries, such as France, Greece and Italy. 
Different  proportions  in  the  remuneration  structure  are  in  the  cultures  of  low  level  of 
uncertainty  avoidance.  In  such  cultures,  bonuses  to  salary  are  the  main  motivational  tool. 
Remuneration system is based on variable components of remuneration, particularly built on bonuses 
for individual results, is key feature of individualistic cultures, such as American culture. It supports 
employees’ efficiency assessment system based on the results and achievements of an individual. It 
can  also  be  used  in  collectivist  cultures  but  bonuses  are  awarded,  in  such  cases,  for  the  teams’ 
achievements. That is why in America remuneration is primarily based on the variable, which is very 
motivating and encouraging to increase efficiency (Wachowiak, 2009, p. 12). 
American remuneration system forces employees to maintain effectiveness on the high level since 
it is verified on the ongoing basis. Such a solution may be difficult to accept by Europeans, especially 
those  who  are  not  accustomed  to  the  strong  competition  in  the  workplace  and  this  can  also  cause 
dissatisfaction from the salary (Wachowiak, 2009, p. 12).  Americans are willing to accept up to 100% of 
the salary depending on the discretionary assessment, while for the Asians and Europeans the variable 
part of the remuneration may only in exceptional cases exceed 10% (Wachowiak, 2005, p. 121). 
Additionally,  in  the  Western  culture  countries  the  remuneration  based  on  individual 
achievement  assessment  may  be  perceived  as  demotivating  since  a  teamwork  is  more  widely 
promoted, which requires collaboration, rather than competition between in dividuals (Sułkowski, 
2010, p. 92). This is the result of changes in the work system caused by the knowledge-based economy. 
In Asia giving bonuses can be an element of power, a tool that emphasizes the manager’s 
position. Hence, the role of bonuses is completely different from the one in America.  The bonuses 
in Asia give a sense of power to the manager and that is the source if their motivating impact and the 
potentially increased employees’ engagement follows later (Sułkowski, 2010, p. 95). It is related to 
the  criteria  based  on  which  bonuses  are  awarded,  that  is  behaviours  for  which  employees  are 
additionally rewarded. In Europe, it is natural that bonuses are paid employees for aspects on which 
they have minor influence and are also minimally affected by direct results, like for instance seniority. 
 
Table 2. Typical internal remuneration structure. A comparative analysis 
Remuneration components  America  Asia  Europe 
Bonuses for results  18%  14%  18% 
Basic salary  29%  45%  52% 
Non-financial benefits  21%  18%  18% 
Shares and stock options  63%  11%  12% 
Source: http://www.placa.pl/badania_zarobki, access, 15 February 2022 
 
The results in the graphical presentation are presented on in Figure 15. 
8 

| Remuneration components   | America   | Asia   | Europe   |
|:--------------------------|:----------|:-------|:---------|
| Bonuses for results       | 18%       | 14%    | 18%      |
| Basic salary              | 29%       | 45%    | 52%      |
| Non-financial benefits    | 21%       | 18%    | 18%      |
| Shares and stock options  | 63%       | 11%    | 12%      |

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
0.7 0.63
0.6
0.52
0.45
0.5
0.4 America
0.29
Europe
0.3
0.21
Asia
0.18 0.18 0.18 0.18
0.2 0.14
0.12
0.11
0.1
0
Bonuses for results Basic salary Non-salary benefits Shares and shares
options
 
Figure 2 – Typical internal remuneration structure. A comparative analysis 
Source: http://www.placa.pl/badania_zarobki, access, 15 February 2022 
Results and Discussion 
In Asia, America and Europe – under the internal remuneration structure of a given employee, besides 
permanent and variable elements, there are also additional benefits. They include employees and 
management’s benefits. The extent of their use as well as the type of benefits depend on a culture or 
habits in a given country. 
In cultures of the high level of uncertainty avoidance, insurance, retirement and health systems 
are particularly extensive and they increase the sense of security. On the other hand, the use of long-
term rewarding forms is limited as well as the results-related forms, such as bonuses, options and 
shares. They are perceived as risky and therefore, not popular. 
Otherwise  can  be  observed  in  America  where  63%  of  American  companies  offer  their 
employees stock options. In Europe, especially highly valued is basic salary and employees’ benefits 
in countries of high femininity levels, such as Sweden, Norway and Denmark. 
It should be noted that in Asia, Europe and America there is a different mentality of employees.  
 
Table 3 – Employees mentality in America, Asia and Europe 
  America  Asia  Europe 
Employees mentality  Employees  are  very  Employees  are  fully  Employees  work  for 
responsible  at  work,  dedicated,  frequently  financial  rewards,  they 
they  are  not  as  workaholics,  very  expect  high 
meticulous for instance  distanced  towards  remuneration  and 
while  giving  managers,  extensive  motivation 
presentations,  as  conscientious  and  system. 
Europeans.  meticulous. 
Employees expectations  Shares  and  stock  High  salary  and  High  basic  salary  and 
options  benefits  extensive  social 
High salary  package 
Source: based on information from GeoVision Inc., access February 2022 
 
The following table shows the basis for bonuses in America, Asia and Europe. Studies carried 
out in international companies allow specifying factors affecting bonuses.  
 
 
9 

|                        | America                 | Asia                  | Europe                  |
|:-----------------------|:------------------------|:----------------------|:------------------------|
| Employees mentality    | Employees are very      | Employees are fully   | Employees work for      |
|                        | responsible at work,    | dedicated, frequently | financial rewards, they |
|                        | they are not as         | workaholics, very     | expect high             |
|                        | meticulous for instance | distanced towards     | remuneration and        |
|                        | while giving            | managers,             | extensive motivation    |
|                        | presentations, as       | conscientious and     | system.                 |
|                        | Europeans.              | meticulous.           |                         |
| Employees expectations | Shares and stock        | High salary and       | High basic salary and   |
|                        | options                 | benefits              | extensive social        |
|                        | High salary             |                       | package                 |

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
Table 4 – Factors affecting receiving bonuses specified by employees 
  America  Asia  Europe 
Work quality  60%  65%  45% 
Engagement level  55%  45%  23% 
Bonuses are not awarded  21%  3%  4% 
Being liked by the  19%  21%  38% 
company’s management 
Good Luck  6%  11%  29% 
Coincidence  5%  5%  21% 
Source: based on information from GeoVision Inc., access February 2022 
 
The most important factor determining receiving bonuses by employees is the quality of the 
performed work and the employees’ involvement in their work. The graphical presentation below 
shows the results. 
0.05
Coincidence 0.21
0.05
0.06
Good luck 0.29
0.11
Depends on the managments sympathy towards 0.19
0.38 America
employee 0.21
Europe
0.21
Bonuses are not awarded 0.04
0.03
Asia
0.55
Engagement degree 0.23
0.45
0.6
Work quality 0.45
0.65
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
 
Figure 3 – Factors affecting receiving bonuses 
Source: based on information from GeoVision Inc., access February 2022 
 
Non-salary  benefits  in  America,  Asia,  Asia  and  Europe  are  increasingly  used  in  the 
remuneration system as a cafeteria system, i.e. to be chosen by an employee and frequently, as a 
benefit for all or specific groups of employees (Białas, 2013, p. 287). 
The most common work benefits include (Białas, 2013, p. 289): 
- life, accident, retirement insurance; 
- covering the costs of an employee and sometimes his family medical treatment (stay in 
private clinics, dental services); 
- the opportunity to purchase shares and bonds at a price lower than the market price; 
- housing loans, housing low-interest loans guarantee, moving house expenses, flat rental; 
- covering the cost of an employee and his children learning, the fees for language courses, 
computer and sports classes; 
- covering the cost of trips at the weekend; 
- the right to purchase a product or service at special prices; 
- treatments at the beautician’s; 
- birthday and Christmas presents; 
- business car and the cost of its operation, mobile phone, lunch, hairdresser, clothes; 
10 

|                         | America   | Asia   | Europe   |
|:------------------------|:----------|:-------|:---------|
| Work quality            | 60%       | 65%    | 45%      |
| Engagement level        | 55%       | 45%    | 23%      |
| Bonuses are not awarded | 21%       | 3%     | 4%       |
| Being liked by the      | 19%       | 21%    | 38%      |
| company’s management    |           |        |          |
| Good Luck               | 6%        | 11%    | 29%      |
| Coincidence             | 5%        | 5%     | 21%      |

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
- free or paid meals.  
In the case of senior executives in America other forms of remunerations are applied – the so-
called deterred compensation in the form of shares or application and options to purchase shares 
(Griffin, 2003, p. 530). 
The assessment of all remuneration forms should include information how the remunerations 
components  are  formed  as  a  result  of  their  operation  allows  the  company’s  goals  achievements 
(Griffin, 2003, p. 531). 
A remuneration is an instrument which strongly affects attracting and stabilizing employees 
need  in  the  organisation,  motivating  employees  and  shaping  their  organisational  behaviours, 
especially pro-effectiveness behaviours (Kozioł, 2003, p. 52). 
The  role  of motivating employees  is  undeniable  and  of the  highest  priority.  Crucial  role 
performs those employees who acquire new customers and most importantly, shape the international 
company’s image. However, only a well-designed motivational system may be beneficial for the 
company. 
Employees who are satisfied with their work and more importantly, well-motivated are able 
to promote the company the best. The efficient work of employees translates into tangible profits for 
the company and other workers. Employees of international companies are systematically encouraged 
to increase qualifications but their motivation level is usually average. The most important is to adapt 
a motivational system to the culture and customs of a given country. In Asia, people are willing to 
dedicate their private time to work – they expect only a good salary, in America – shares stock options 
are most welcomed, while in Europe – the high basic salary and for instance, an extensive social 
packet are most appreciated.  
An adequate motivational system management can be expressed by the means of various 
forms. It can be defined in the form of higher remuneration or it may be observed through the success 
of the company, such as prestigious awards. Such forms, however, are determined by employees’ 
qualifications, their expectations and culture.   
1. Qualitative research 
Running business abroad creates new possibilities for a company as the new culture affects 
its business relations (on the example of SAP, German company, operating both in Poland and in the 
Czech Republic. 
The country’s culture, as well as organizational culture of companies compromise three layers: 
human creations and behaviours which are external manifestations of culture, norms, values and basic 
assumptions. As far as the external manifestations of culture are made well aware of and visible, 
standards  and  values  are  partly  visible  and  perceived,  while  basic  assumptions  are  recognised 
subconsciously as axiom and are undisputed. Basic assumptions manifest themselves in the human 
behaviour automatism. They impel to interpret reality and problems associated with it in a specific 
way.  
1.1. Sample 
Thirty managers working in Czech and Polish subsidiary of SAP, 30 senior managers each 
company, were interviewed.  
I have met with all the respondents individually to carry out the interview. It took place in 
February 2022. 
For the purpose of the research I have prepared standardized and formalized questionnaire. 
The  research  was  conducted  directly.  The  questions  were  closed  and  one  open  question.  The 
questionnaire in A4 format used in the research comprised 11 questions (5 questions defining the 
group, and 6 main questions). As a respondents’ opinions researcher, I have filled it myself. The first 
part of the questions concerned general information about the respondents – their sex, age, seniority, 
employment status and financial status.  
The second and main part of the interview contained questions connected with the influence 
of the Polish and the Czech national cultures on business relationships and motivation, as well as how 
those cultures shape those processes. The results of the research also depicted business cultures in 
11 

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
Poland and the Czech Republic. Moreover, the conducted research provided answer to the question 
whether – according to the SAP managers – stereotypes about a particular country influence the 
reception of a given national group. 
1.2. Respondents structure 
Sex of the SAP respondents in Poland and the Czech Republic  
In the Polish subsidiary of SAP 7 women (23%) and 23 men (77%) participated in the study, 
while in the Czech SAP – 14 women (47%) and 16 men (53%).  
 
 
Figure 4 – Sex of the respondents in the Polish branch office of SAP and  
in the Czech branch of SAP 
Source: own research 
 
Respondents’ age 
As regards the respondents’ age from the Polish subsidiary - people over 35 constituted 63% 
of all employees, aged between 28 to 35 compromised 30% and aged 20 to 27 - only 7%. In the Czech 
company people over 35 comprised 80% of all workers, aged between 28 to 25 - 17 % and aged 20 
to 27 merely 3%. 
 
Figure 5 – Respondents’ age 
Source: own research 
12 

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
Seniority in the subsidiary in Poland and in the Czech Republic 
The  responses  of  the  analysis  show  that  majority  of  respondents  (Poland  –  93%,  Czech 
Republic – 90%) work in current companies from 13 to 36 months. There were only two respondents 
from the Polish subsidiary and three from the Czech subsidiary who work there from 13 to 36 months.  
 
 
Figure 6 – Seniority in the subsidiary in Poland and in the Czech Republic 
Source: own research 
 
Form of employment 
The responses from the Polish subsidiary (100%) and the Czech subsidiary are employed 
based on the employment contract. 
 
Table 5 – Form of employment 
Subsidiary in Poland  Subsidiary in the Czech Republic 
Form of employment  Study group (N = 30) 
N  %  N  % 
Employment contract  30  100  30  100 
Commission contract 
0  0  0  0 
Total 
30  100  30  100 
Source: own research 
 
Sole answers “employment contract”, researching correlation has no point 
 
Material status 
The analysis of the responses shows that the majority of respondents (Polish branch office – 
80%, Czech branch office – 53%) have an average material status, high material status – Polish 
office – 10%, Czech office – 40%) and low – Polish office – 10% and Czech office – 7%. 
 
 
13 

| Form of employment   | Subsidiary in Poland   | None   | Subsidiary in the Czech Republic   | None   |
|:---------------------|:-----------------------|:-------|:-----------------------------------|:-------|
|                      | Study group (N = 30)   |        |                                    |        |
|                      | N                      | %      | N                                  | %      |
| Employment contract  | 30                     | 100    | 30                                 | 100    |
| Commission contract  | 0                      | 0      | 0                                  | 0      |
| Total                | 30                     | 100    | 30                                 | 100    |

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
Table 6 – Material status 
Subsidiary in Poland  Subsidiary in the Czech Republic 
Answer  Study group (N = 30) 
N  %  N  % 
Low  3  10  2  7 
Average  24  80  16  53 
High  3  10  12  40 
Total  30  100  30  100 
Source: own research 
 
 
Figure 7 – Material status 
Source: own research 
 
The next question was as follows: Does Czech/ Polish national culture affect business 
relations? 
Focus area 
 
Table 7 – Characteristics of the business culture in Poland and in the Czech Republic 
Subsidiary in Poland  Subsidiary in the Czech Republic 
Answer  Study group (N = 30) 
N  N 
Timeliness  27  22 
Accuracy   24  27 
Special emphasis on ethics   20  24 
Entrepreneurship  2  12 
Source: own research 
 
A multiple-choice question, ibid. 
In the Polish subsidiary, timeliness and accuracy are most important, while in the Czech 
Republic subsidiary most attention is paid to accuracy and special emphasis on ethics.  
 
14 

| Answer   | Subsidiary in Poland   | None   | Subsidiary in the Czech Republic   | None   |
|:---------|:-----------------------|:-------|:-----------------------------------|:-------|
|          | Study group (N = 30)   |        |                                    |        |
|          | N                      | %      | N                                  | %      |
| Low      | 3                      | 10     | 2                                  | 7      |
| Average  | 24                     | 80     | 16                                 | 53     |
| High     | 3                      | 10     | 12                                 | 40     |
| Total    | 30                     | 100    | 30                                 | 100    |

| Answer                     | Subsidiary in Poland   | Subsidiary in the Czech Republic   |
|:---------------------------|:-----------------------|:-----------------------------------|
|                            | Study group (N = 30)   |                                    |
|                            | N                      | N                                  |
| Timeliness                 | 27                     | 22                                 |
| Accuracy                   | 24                     | 27                                 |
| Special emphasis on ethics | 20                     | 24                                 |
| Entrepreneurship           | 2                      | 12                                 |

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
 
Figure 8 – Characteristics of the business culture in Poland and in the Czech Republic 
Source: own research 
Table 8 – Does Czech/ Polish national culture affect business relations? 
Subsidiary in Poland  Subsidiary in the Czech Republic 
Answer  Study group (N = 30) 
N  %  N  % 
Yes  28  98  25  87 
No  2  2  5  13 
Total  30  100  30  100 
Source: own research 
 
 
Figure 9 – Does Czech/ Polish national culture affect business relations? 
 
National culture both, in Poland and in the Czech Republic strikingly affects business 
relations. It should be noted that each country has a distinctive culture which facilitates or hinders 
business processes.  
 
15 

| Answer   | Subsidiary in Poland   | None   | Subsidiary in the Czech Republic   | None   |
|:---------|:-----------------------|:-------|:-----------------------------------|:-------|
|          | Study group (N = 30)   |        |                                    |        |
|          | N                      | %      | N                                  | %      |
| Yes      | 28                     | 98     | 25                                 | 87     |
| No       | 2                      | 2      | 5                                  | 13     |
| Total    | 30                     | 100    | 30                                 | 100    |

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
Table 9 – How does the national culture affect business processes? 
Subsidiary in Poland 
Subsidiary in the Czech Republic  
Answer 
Study group (N = 30) 
 
N  N 
Facilitates transaction 
27  22 
execution 
Accelerates the company 
22  27 
development 
Increases the company 
5  27 
prestige 
Source: own research 
 
A multiple-choice question (here for the entire analysis can be used the table only). 
On the question – How does culture affect business processes? - obtained were the following 
responses from the Polish subsidiary: facilitates transaction execution – 27 responses, accelerates the 
company development – 22 responses and increases the company prestige. Employees from the 
Czech  company  gave  the  following  responses:  increases  the  company  prestige  –  27  responses, 
accelerates  the  company  development  –  27  responses  and  facilitates  transaction  execution  –  22 
responses.  
 
Figure 10. How does the national culture affect business processes? 
Source: own research 
 
Table 10 – Do stereotypes about a country impact the perception of the national  
culture of that country? 
Subsidiary in Poland  Subsidiary in the Czech Republic 
Answer  Study group (N = 30) 
N  %  N  % 
Yes  20  60  25  87 
No  10  40  5  13 
Total  30  100  30  100 
Source: own research 
16 

| Answer                  | Subsidiary in Poland   | Subsidiary in the Czech Republic   |
|:------------------------|:-----------------------|:-----------------------------------|
|                         | Study group (N = 30)   |                                    |
|                         | N                      | N                                  |
| Facilitates transaction | 27                     | 22                                 |
| execution               |                        |                                    |
| Accelerates the company | 22                     | 27                                 |
| development             |                        |                                    |
| Increases the company   | 5                      | 27                                 |
| prestige                |                        |                                    |

| Answer   | Subsidiary in Poland   | None   | Subsidiary in the Czech Republic   | None   |
|:---------|:-----------------------|:-------|:-----------------------------------|:-------|
|          | Study group (N = 30)   |        |                                    |        |
|          | N                      | %      | N                                  | %      |
| Yes      | 20                     | 60     | 25                                 | 87     |
| No       | 10                     | 40     | 5                                  | 13     |
| Total    | 30                     | 100    | 30                                 | 100    |

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
Both, Polish and Czech respondents confirmed that stereotypes about a country impact the 
perception of the national culture of that country. 
 
Figure 11 – Do stereotypes about a country impact the perception  
of the national culture of that country? 
Source: own research 
The next chart concerns the question what the greatest motivation to work in a team for the 
respondents is. In this case, the respondent could select up to two answers. When asked what the 
greatest motivation for the respondents to work in a team is, seventeen people indicated two answers, 
and fifteen people selected one answer each.  
 
 
17 

| The next chart concerns the question what the greatest motivation to work in a team for the           |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| respondents is. In this case, the respondent could select up to two answers. When asked what the      |
| greatest motivation for the respondents to work in a team is, seventeen people indicated two answers, |
| and fifteen people selected one answer each.                                                          |
|                                                                                                       |

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
 
Figure 12 – What motivates you the most at work place? 
 
According to the employees of the surveyed team, the greatest motivation for them is cash 
rewards in the form of bonuses. This variant was selected by 12 respondents in Poland and 10 in the 
Czech Republic. Eleven people indicated that they were most motivated by the possibility of further 
personal development (6 in Poland, and 4 in the Czech Republic). In-kind prizes, important for 11 
people  (5  in  Poland,  and  6  in  the  Czech  Republic).  Motivation  in  the  form  of  participation  in 
development training was declared by 5 respondents. For six people, praise and distinctions from the 
supervisor for good work are important. Only two people feel motivated by their basic salary in 
Poland, and 4 in the Czech Republic. 
 
18 

|                                                                                                      |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| According to the employees of the surveyed team, the greatest motivation for them is cash            |
| rewards in the form of bonuses. This variant was selected by 12 respondents in Poland and 10 in the  |
| Czech Republic. Eleven people indicated that they were most motivated by the possibility of further  |
| personal development (6 in Poland, and 4 in the Czech Republic). In-kind prizes, important for 11    |
| people (5 in Poland, and 6 in the Czech Republic). Motivation in the form of participation in        |
| development training was declared by 5 respondents. For six people, praise and distinctions from the |
| supervisor for good work are important. Only two people feel motivated by their basic salary in      |
| Poland, and 4 in the Czech Republic.                                                                 |

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
 
Figure 13 – What else motivates you at work (an open-ended question)? 
 
The next question was open-ended, its aim was to answer the question of how else he could 
motivate employees to increase their commitment to work in a team. Here you had to write your 
proposal (you could give several answers. The largest number, as many as twenty people would like 
to increase their salary. Friendly atmosphere at work, came next. For 15 (7 Polish, 8 Czech) people 
fair treatment is important and for nine (4 Polish respondents, and 5 Czechs) people the possibility of 
using their own potential at work. Eight people indicated that the possibility of promotion would 
affect greater involvement.  
Conclusions 
National culture significantly affects its business relations and employee motivation. An example of 
this includes German company SAP, which operates both in Poland and in the Czech Republic.  
National culture impacts organisation’s standards and values. Not without significance is also 
the influence of regional and local cultures and the society’s current value system. Important is also 
the company size and complexity (possibility of subcultures), average age of staff, company history, 
personality characteristics of founders, managers and individual employees. Type of a company – 
company’s culture depends on industry and technology. Important is also the form of ownership, 
market conditions and the strength of the competition.  
According to 98% of respondents working in the Polish branch of SAP Company the national 
culture significantly influences all business relations and 87% of Czech respondents have been of the 
same opinion. Thus, research carried out confirmed that. Respondents see the influence of national 
culture  when  comes  to:  facilitating  transaction  execution.  Increasing  the  company  prestige  and 
accelerating the company development.  
Moreover, in this particular case, from the analysis of the study of the two companies it 
appears that the national culture of the company’s origin country has little influence on management 
and motivation model in the company. This is mostly due to the fact that the Poles and the Czechs 
account for the vast majority of the workers in the Polish and Czech branches. As a result, the transfer 
of domestic attitudes and cultural values to the company’s head office is not so significant as in the 
case when most of the workers in the local offices would be expatriates. 
To sum up, national culture is an essential factor creating new possibilities. Both directors and 
managers devote a lot of attention to this aspect.  
But  regardless  of  where  a  company  is  located,  and  what  its  background  is,  the  proper 
adaptation of motivational methods and tools is the main prerequisite for successfully encouraging 
19 

|                                                                                                         |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| The next question was open-ended, its aim was to answer the question of how else he could               |
| motivate employees to increase their commitment to work in a team. Here you had to write your           |
| proposal (you could give several answers. The largest number, as many as twenty people would like       |
| to increase their salary. Friendly atmosphere at work, came next. For 15 (7 Polish, 8 Czech) people     |
| fair treatment is important and for nine (4 Polish respondents, and 5 Czechs) people the possibility of |
| using their own potential at work. Eight people indicated that the possibility of promotion would       |
| affect greater involvement.                                                                             |

ISSN 2535-0358 (Print), ISSN 2815-3324 (Online)  Politics & Security, Vol. 6, No. 3, – 2022 
 
employees  to  properly  engage  in  their  work.  Appropriate  organizational  assumptions  about 
motivation  are  not  enough.  Companies  must  understand  what  factors  are  the  ones  that  actually 
determine employee engagement and motivate them in the right way. If they don't, instead of being 
totally committed to their work, employees will only routinely perform their assigned duties. The role 
of the manager or team leader is also extremely important here. She or he should not only gain the 
trust of his team members but, “design” it in such a way that he can give each of them due attention 
and entrust as many opportunities as possible so that the team could perform the tasks it likes. 
References 
Andrews, T. G., Mead, R., (2011). Zarządzanie międzynarodowe. Warszawa: Wolters Kluwer, pp. 12-93. 
Borkowska,  S.  (2004).  Wynagrodzenia  –  rozwiązywanie  problemów  w  praktyce.  Kraków:  Oficyna 
Ekonomiczna, p. 63. 
Bendick, M., Egan, Jr., M. L., Lofhjelm, S. M. (2001). Workforce diversity training: From anti-discrimination 
compliance to organizational development. Human Resource Planning 24, p. 10-25. 
Białas, S. (2013) Zarządzanie zasobami ludzkimi w otoczeniu międzynarodowym: kulturowe uwarunkowania. 
Warszawa: Wydawnictwa Profesjonalne PWN, pp. 72-289. 
Davenport, T. H. (2007). Zarządzanie pracownikami wiedzy. Kraków: Wolters Kluwer Business, pp. 17-20. 
Dębski, D. (2009) Ekonomika i organizacja przedsiębiorstw. Warszawa: WSiP, pp. 33-67. 
Edvinsson, L., Malone, M. S. (2001). Kapitał intelektualny. Warszawa: Wydawnictwo naukowe PWN, pp. 10-
45. 
Gick,  A.,  Tarczyńska  M.  (1999).  Motywowanie  pracowników: systemy,  techniki,  praktyka.  Warszawa: 
Polskie Wydawnictwo Ekonomiczne, p.58. 
Glinka,  B.,  Jelonek,  A.  (2011).  Zarządzanie  międzykulturowe.  Kraków:  Wydawnictwo  Uniwersytetu 
Jagiellońskiego, pp. 22-99. 
Griffin, R.W. (2003). Podstawy zarządzania organizacjami. Warszawa: PWN., p. 28., p. 530-531. 
Kostera, M. (2006). Zarządzanie personelem. Warszawa: Polskie Wydawnictwo Ekonomiczne, pp. 82-92. 
Kozioł L., Tyrańska M., Motywowanie pracowników w teorii i praktyce, Biblioteczka Pracownicza, Warszawa 
2002 
Kulik, C. T., Roberson. L. (2008). Common goals and golden opportunities: Evaluations diversity education 
in academic and organizational settings. Academy of Management Learning & Education 7, p. 310. 
Łuka, M., Sęk, E. (2013). Potrzeby człowieka współczesnego i ich zaspokajanie. Sandomierz: Wydawnictwo 
Diecezjalne i Drukarnia, Sandomierz, p. 65. 
Michalski,  E. (2013).  Zarządzanie przedsiębiorstwem:  podręcznik  akademicki.  Warszawa:  Wydawnictwo 
Naukowe PWN, p. 65-101. 
Piotrkowski, K. (2009) Organizacja i zarządzanie. Warszawa: Wyższa Szkoła Ekonomiczna, p. 138. 
Pocztowski, A. (2007). Zarządzanie zasobami ludzkimi: strategie - procesy – metody. Warszawa: Polskie 
Wydawnictwo Ekonomiczne, p. 10-45, p. 156. 
Sajkiewicz, R.W. (1999). Zasoby ludzkie w firmie. Warszawa: Wydawnictwo Poltext, p. 199. 
Sułkowski, Ł. (2010). Zarządzanie międzykulturowe w teorii i praktyce. Łódź: Wydawnictwo Społecznej 
Wyższej Szkoły Przedsiębiorczości i Zarządzania, pp. 32-95. 
Winch, J. (2015). Cultural Influences in a multicultural academic workplace. Retrieved June 6, 2016,  from 
Journal of Language and Cultural Education, 3(3), DOI: 10.1515/jolace-2015-0022 
Gach, D. (2007). Relacje między kulturą a realizacją procesów zarządzania wiedzą w organizacjach (cz. I). E-
mentor. Retrieved from http://www.e-mentor.edu.pl/artykul/index/numer/21/id/461 
Wachowiak,  P.  (2009).  Mapowanie  wiedzy  w  przedsiębiorstwie.  From:  e-mentor  no.1  http://www.e-
mentor.edu.pl/artykul/index/numer/28/id/616 
http://www.placa.pl/badania_zarobki, access, 15 February 2022 
Information received from GeoVision Inc., access February 2022 
 
20 