ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF NUMBERS RELATED TO THE
DIVISORS OF xn − 1
5102 voN 01  ]TN.htam[  1v03230.1151:viXra
SAI TEJA SOMU
Abstract. Let n ,··· ,n be any finite sequence of integers and let S be
1 r
the set of all natural numbers n for which there exists a divisor d(x) = 1 +
Pdeg(d) c xi of xn −1 such that c = n for 1 ≤ i ≤ r. In this paper we show
i=1 i i i
that the set S has a natural density. Furthermore, we find the value of the
natural density of S.
1. Introduction
Cyclotomic polynomials arise naturally as irreducible divisors of xn − 1. The
polynomial xn − 1 can be factored in the following way
n
(1) x − 1 = φ (x).
d
Y
d|n
Applying Mobius inversion we get
(2) φ n(x) = (xd − 1)µ(n d).
Y
d|n
The problem of determining size of maximum coefficient of cyclotomic polynomials
has been the subject of the papers [4] and [1]. In [3] Pomerance and Ryan study
the size of maximum coefficient of divisors of xn − 1.
It has been proven that for every finite sequence of integers (n )r , there exists
i i=1
deg(d)
d(x) = 1 + c xi, a divisor of xn − 1 for some n ∈ N, such that c = n for
i i i
i=1
P
1 ≤ i ≤ r. In this paper we investigate the following problem. For a given sequence
(n )r , let S(n ,··· ,n ) denote the set of all n such that xn −1 has a divisor d(x)
i i=1 1 r
r deg(d)
of the form d(x) = 1 + n xi + c xi. We prove that S(n ,··· ,n ) has a
i i 1 r
i=1 i=r+1
P P
natural density. Observe that if n ∈ S(n ,··· ,n ) then every multiple of n is in
1 r
S(n ,··· ,n ).
1 r
2. Notation
If f(x) and g(x) are two analytic functions in some neighborhood of 0, we denote
f(x) ≡ g(x) mod xr+1 if the coefficients of xi in the power series of f(x) and g(x)
are equal for 0 ≤ i ≤ r.
Date: November 9, 2015.
1

2 SAI TEJA SOMU
We denote ω(n) for number of distinct prime factors of n. Let δ(d) be 1 if d 6= 1
and δ(d) be −1 otherwise. Note that
µ(n)
(3) φ (x) = δ(n) 1 − xd d .
n
Y d|n (cid:0) (cid:1)
3. Proof of Main Theorem
We require several lemmas in order to prove that S(n ,··· ,n ) has a natural
1 r
density.
Lemma 3.1. For every finite sequence of integers n ,··· ,n there exists a unique
1 r
sequence of integers k ,··· ,k such that
1 r
r r
xi )k xi xr+1.
(4) (1 − i ≡ 1 + n mod
i
Y X
i=1 i=1
Proof. The proof that there exists a sequence k ,··· ,k is by induction on r. If
1 r
r = 1 and n ∈ Z then (1 − x)−n 1 ≡ 1 + n x mod x2 hence the existence part of
1 1
lemma is true for r = 1. If we assume that the existence part of lemma is true for
)r+1,
r, then for any sequence of r + 1 integers (n there exist r integers k ,··· ,k
i i=1 1 r
such that
r r
xi )k xi xr+1.
(1 − i ≡ 1 + n mod
i
Y X
i=1 i=1
Let n′ be an integer such that
r+1
r r
(1 − xi )k i ≡ 1 + n xi + n′ xr+1 mod xr+2.
i r+1
Y X
i=1 i=1
We have
r r+1
′
xi )k xr+1)n r+1−n ixi xr+2.
(1 − i(1 − r+1 ≡ 1 + n mod
Y X
i=1 i=1
Hence the existence part of the lemma is true for r + 1.
For the uniqueness part, if there are two finite sequences k ,··· ,k and k′,··· ,k′
1 r 1 r
such that
r r
′
xi )k xi )k xr+1.
(1 − i ≡ (1 − i mod
Y Y
i=1 i=1
If the two sequences are distinct then let i be the least index such that k −k′ 6= 0
i i
then we have
r
′
xi )k i−k xi+1
(1 − i ≡ 1 mod
Y
j=i
or
k′)xi xi+1
1 − (k − ≡ 1 mod
i i
which implies k − k′ = 0 contradicting the assumption that k − k′ 6= 0. (cid:3)
i i i i
For a given sequence n ,··· ,n we proved that there exists a unique sequence
1 r
k (n ,··· ,n ),··· ,k (n ,··· ,n ) such that equation (4) is true. Let A(n ,··· ,n )
1 1 r r 1 r 1 r
be the set defined by A(n ,··· ,n ) := {1 ≤ i ≤ r : k (n ,··· ,n ) 6= 0}. If the
1 r i 1 r
set A(n ,··· ,n ) is non empty let l(n ,··· ,n ) be the least common multiple of
1 r 1 r
elements of A(n ,··· ,n ), otherwise let l(n ,··· ,n ) be 1.
1 r 1 r

ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF NUMBERS RELATED TO THE DIVISORS OF xn −1 3
Lemma 3.2. If n ∈ S(n ,··· ,n ) then n is a multiple l(n ,··· ,n ).
1 r 1 r
Proof. We will prove that if l(n ,··· ,n ) ∤ n then n ∈/ S(n ,··· ,n ). If l(n ,··· ,n )
1 r 1 r 1 r
does not divide n then there exists an i ∈ A(n ,··· ,n ) such that i ∤ n. That is,
1 r
k (n ,··· ,n ) 6= 0 and i ∤ n.
i 1 r
Any divisor d(x) of xn − 1 such that d(0) = 1 will be of the form
d(x) = δ(d)φ (x),
d
Y
d∈S
where S is some subset of set of divisors of n. Hence
d(x) = δ(d)φ (x)
d
Y
d∈S
µ( d ′)
′
d d
= 1 − x
dY ∈SdY′|d(cid:16) (cid:17)
µ( d ′)
′
xd d xr+1
≡ 1 − mod
1≤Y d′≤rd≡0 Y d′ (cid:16) (cid:17)
mod
d∈S
r
xj )l xr+1,
≡ (1 − j mod
Y
j=1
where l = µ d for 1 ≤ m ≤ r. Therefore as i ∤ n, l = 0.
m d∈S m i
d≡0 mod m
P (cid:0) (cid:1)
Hence l 6= k (n ,··· ,n ) and from uniqueness part of Lemma 3.1 we have d(x) 6≡
i i 1 r
1 + r n xj mod xr+1. Hence n ∈/ S(n ,··· ,n ). (cid:3)
j=1 j 1 r
P
Lemma 3.3. If p ,··· ,p are distinct primes greater than r not dividing d and
1 s
q ,··· ,q are distinct primes greater than r and not dividing d then for all natural
1 s
numbers e ,··· ,e we have φ (x) ≡ φ (x) mod xr+1.
1 s dpe1···pes dqe1···qes
1 s 1 s
Proof. For every divisor d′ of d we have µ dpe 11···pe ss = µ dq 1e1···q ses . From equa-
d′ d′
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
tion (2)
dpe 11···pe ss
µ
′ ′
φ (x) ≡ 1 − xd (cid:18) d (cid:19) mod xr+1
dpe1···pes
1 s dY′|d(cid:16) (cid:17)
1e1···qses
dq
µ
′ ′
≡ 1 − xd (cid:18) d (cid:19) mod xr+1
dY′|d(cid:16) (cid:17)
xr+1.
≡ φ (x) mod
dqe1···qes
1 s
(cid:3)
Lemma 3.4. If p and p are two distinct primes greater than r and if d ≤ r then
1 2
φ (x) ≡ δ(d)φ mod xr+1.
dp p d
1 2

4 SAI TEJA SOMU
Proof. From (2) we have
µ(dp1p2)
′ ′
xd d xr+1
φ (x) ≡ 1 − mod
dp p
1 2
dY′|d(cid:16) (cid:17)
µ( d )
′ ′
xd d xr+1
≡ 1 − mod
dY′|d(cid:16) (cid:17)
xr+1.
≡ δ(d)φ (x) mod
d
(cid:3)
Lemma 3.5. For every finite sequence n ,··· ,n there exist k distinct primes
1 r
q ,··· ,q greater than r such that n = l(n ,··· ,n )q q ···q ∈ S(n ,··· ,n ).
1 k 1 r 1 2 k 1 r
r
Proof. From Lemma 3.1 we have (1 − xi)k i ≡ 1 + r n xi mod xr+1, where
i=1 i
i=1
Q P
k = k (n ,··· ,n ). From the definition of A(n ,··· ,n ), k 6= 0 if and only if
i i 1 r 1 r i
i ∈ A(n ,··· ,n ). Let i ,··· ,i be the elements of A(n ,··· ,n ). We have
1 r 1 p 1 r
r p
(5) 1 + n xi ≡ (1 − xi j)k ij mod xr+1.
i
X Y
i=1 j=1
(j) (j)
Let r ,··· ,r for 1 ≤ j ≤ p be numbers such that for 1 ≤ a ≤ |k | and
1 |k j| i j1
(j ) (j ) (j)
1 ≤ b ≤ |k |, r 1 = r 2 if and only if j = j and a = b. If k > 0 then r is
i j2 a b 1 2 i j a
(j)
a product of two distinct primes and each prime factor of r is greater than r. If
a
(j)
k < 0 then r is a prime number greater than r.
i a
j
If k > 0 then let
i
j
k
ij
(6) d (x) = φ (x).
j dr(j)
m
Y Y
m=1d|i
j
(j)
If k > 0 then as r is a product two prime factors greater from Lemma 3.4 we
i m
j
have φ (x) ≡ δ(d)φ (x) mod xr+1. Therefore
dr(j) d
m
xr+1
φ (x) ≡ δ(d)φ (x) mod
dr(j) d
m
Y Y
d|i d|i
j j
xi xr+1.
≡ (1 − j) mod
Hence from (6) we have
k
ij
xi xi j)k xr+1.
(7) d (x) ≡ (1 − j) ≡ (1 − ij mod
j
Y
m=1
If k < 0 let
i
j
−k
ij
xr+1.
d (x) = φ (x) mod
j dr(j)
m
Y Y
m=1d|i
j

ON THE DISTRIBUTION OF NUMBERS RELATED TO THE DIVISORS OF xn −1 5
(j)
As k < 0, r is a prime number greater than r. Hence
i m
j
φ (x)
r(j) d
d|i
φ (x) = j m
m(j) Q
dr φ d(x)
Y d|i
d|i j
j
Q
xi jr m(j) − 1
≡ (cid:16) (cid:17) mod xr+1
(xi j − 1)
xi −1 xr+1.
≡ 1 − j mod
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Therefore
−k
ij
(8) d (x) ≡ 1 − xi j −1 ≡ 1 − xi j k ij mod xr+1.
j
mY =1(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
From (5), (7) and (8) we have
p p r
(9) d(x) = d (x) ≡ (1 − xi j)k ij ≡ 1 + n xi mod xr+1.
j i
Y Y X
j=1 j=1 i=1
(j)
If the set {i r : 1 ≤ j ≤ p,1 ≤ m ≤ |k |} is non empty, let n be the least common
j m i
j
multiple of the elements of the set and let n = 1 if the set is empty. Clearly d(x) is
a divisor of xn − 1 and therefore n ∈ S(n ,··· ,n ). Observe that n is of the form
1 r
(cid:3)
l(n ,··· ,n )q q ···q where q ’s are distinct prime factors greater than r.
1 r 1 2 k i
Theorem 3.6. For every finite sequence n ,··· ,n , let N(n ,··· ,n ,x) denote
1 r 1 r
number of n ≤ x such that n ∈ S(n ,··· ,n ). There exists a k ∈ N such that
1 r
x(loglogx)k
N(n ,··· ,n ,x) = C(n ,··· ,n )x + O ,
1 r 1 r
(cid:18) logx (cid:19)
where C(n ,··· ,n ) = 1 .
1 r l(n ,···,n )
1 r
Proof. For brevity, let S(n ,··· ,n ) = S and l(n ,··· ,n ) = l. From Lemma 3.5
1 r 1 r
there exists an m of the form m = lq ···q and a divisor d (x) of xm 1 − 1 such
1 1 1 k 1
that
p
xi xr+1.
(10) d (x) ≡ 1 + n mod
1 i
X
i=1
For every m of the form m = lp ···p such that p ,··· ,p are distinct primes
2 2 1 k 1 k
greater than r. Let S be the set of divisors of m and S be the set of divisors of m .
1 1 2 2
Let g : S → S be a map defined as follows. As l and q ···q are relatively prime,
1 2 1 k
every divisor of d of lq ···q can be uniquely written in the form d = d′ q ···q
1 k 1 i 1 i s
where d′ divides l. Define g(d′ q ···q ) = d′ p ···p . From Lemma 3.3 it follows
1 1 i 1 i s 1 i 1 i s
that φ (x) ≡ φ (x) mod xr+1. As d (x) is of the form δ(d′)φ (x) where
d g(d) 1 d′∈R d′
1
R is a subset of S there will be d 2(x) = δ(g(dQ′))φ g(d′)(x), a divisor of
1 1 d′∈R
1
xm 2 −1, and d (x) ≡ d (x) ≡ 1+ r n xi mQod xr+1. Therefore every number of
2 1 i=1 i
the form lp ···p where p i’s are dPistinct primes greater than r belongs to S which
1 k
implies that every number lm belongs to S, if number of distinct prime factors of
m greater than r is at least k. Hence if ω(m) ≥ r+k then lm ∈ S as ω(m) ≥ r+k

6 SAI TEJA SOMU
implies that number of prime factors of m greater than r is at least k. From 3.1.
Lemma B of [2]
x x(loglogx)r+k−1
N(n ,··· ,n ,x) ≥ |{lm ≤ x : ω(m) ≥ r + k}| = + O .
1 r
l (cid:18) logx (cid:19)
From Lemma 3.2, if n ∈ S then l|n which implies that N(n ,··· ,n ,x) ≤ x.
1 r l
Combining the two inequalities we get
x x(loglogx)r+k−1
N(n ,··· ,n ,x) = + O
1 r
l (cid:18) logx (cid:19)
(cid:3)
which completes the proof of the theorem.
References
[1] D. M. Bloom, On the coefficients of the cyclotomic polynomials, Amer. Math. Monthly, 75,
372-377 (1968).
[2] Hardy, G. H. and Ramanujan, S., The normal number of prime factors of a number n, Quart.
J. Math. 48(1917), 76-92.
[3] C. Pomerance, N.C. Ryan, Maximal height of divisors of xn −1, Illinois J. Math. 51 (2007)
597-604.
[4] R. C. Vaughan, Bounds for the coefficients of cyclotomic polynomials, Michigan Math. J. 21
(1974), 289-295 (1975). MR 0364141 (51 #396)
Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee,India 247667