A simple but energy-efficient HVAC control synthesis for data centers
Fliess1,3 Join2,3 Bekcheva4 Moradi4 Mounier5
Michel , Ce´dric , Maria , Alireza , Hugues
Abstract—The air conditioning management of data centers, 3) Most of the model-based approaches rest on various
a key question with respect to energy saving, is here tackled via optimization techniques (see, e.g., [6], [12], [26], [34],
the recent model-free control synthesis. Mathematical modeling
[38], [43]). Let us add that predictive control (see, e.g.,
becomes useless in this approach. The tuning of the corre-
9102 yaM 91  ]YS.sc[  1v23770.5091:viXra [13], [16], [31], [35], [36], [41], [45]) is essential in
sponding intelligent proportional controller is straightforward.
that respect. Deriving sound mathematical modeling
Computer simulations show excellent tracking performances
in various realistic situations, like CPU load or temperature necessitates complex parameter identification and/or
changes. machine learning procedures in order to get convincing
Key words— Data centers, cloud computing, HVAC, PID,
results (see, e.g., [21]).
model-free control, intelligent proportional controller, tracking.
Remark 2: Besides excellent existing results on the HVAC
of greenhouses [30] and buildings [1], [5], [33], [39], model-
free control has already given birth to many successful
I. INTRODUCTION
concrete applications (see the references in [17] and [4], [22])
Two exciting advances in cloud computing [2], a fast including some patents.
growing industry in information technology, have been re- Our paper is organized as follows. Model-free control
cently derived by the authors: is summarized in Section II. A simplified mathematical
modeling via ordinary differential equations is sketched in
• improving resource elasticity [7] thanks to model-free
Section III for the purpose of computer simulations. The
control in the sense of [17],
performances of our control synthesis are presented and
• workload forecasting [18] via time series analysis as in
discussed in Section IV. Section V is devoted to some
[20].
concluding remarks.
Data centers, which are fundamental in this context, consume
a huge amount of electrical energy [8], [27], [44]. Almost II. WHAT IS MODEL-FREE CONTROL?1
half of it is devoted to their cooling. The aim of this
A. Generalities
communication is to show that model-free control might
Replace the unknown or poorly known SISO system by
provide also a most efficient control tool with respect to air
ultra-local model
conditioning.
y˙ = F + αu (1)
Remark 1: 1) HVAC, i.e., heating, ventilation, and air
conditioning, which is defined by Wikipedia as “the where
technology of indoor and vehicular environmental
• u and y are the input (control) and output variables,
comfort” (see, e.g., [29]), plays therefore a key roˆle • the derivation order of y is 1, like in most concrete
(see, e.g., [11], [28]). The corresponding numbers of
situations,
publications and patents are increasing rapidly. • α ∈ R is chosen by the practitioner such that αu and y˙
2) From an applied control engineering perspective,
are of the same magnitude.
on/off and PID controllers seem to be widely used (see,
The following explanations on F might be useful:
e.g., [9], [14], [15], [32], [37], [40], and the references
• F subsumes the knowledge of any model uncertainties
therein). To a large extent this situation is explained by
and disturbances,
their conceptual simplicity. Nevertheless their tuning,
• F is estimated via the measures of u and y.
which is too often a quagmire, might lead to poor
performances. B. Intelligent controllers
The loop is closed by an intelligent proportional con-
1 LIX (CNRS, UMR 7161), E´cole polytechnique, 91128 Palaiseau,
troller, or iP,
Fra 2n Cc Re, AM Nic (h Ce Nl.F Rl Sie ,ss U@ Mp Roly 7te 0c 3h 9n ),iq Uue n. ie vd eu −Fˆ − y˙∗ + K Pe
rsite´ de Lorraine, BP 239, 54506 u = (2)
Vandœuvre-le`s-Nancy, France, cedric.join@univ-lorraine.fr α
3
AL.I.E.N. (ALge`bre pour Identification & Estimation Nume´riques), 7
where
rue Maurice Barre`s, 54330 Ve´zelise, France,
{michel.fliess, cedric.join}@alien-sas.com • y⋆ is the reference trajectory,
4
Inagral, 128 rue de la Boe´tie, 75008 Paris, France, • e = y − y⋆ is the tracking error,
{maria, alireza@inagral.com}
5 • K is the usual tuning gain.
Laboratoire des Signaux et Syste`mes (L2S), Universite´ Paris-Sud- P
CNRS-CentraleSupe´lec, Universite´ Paris-Saclay, 91192 Gif-sur-Yvette,
France, hugues.mounier@l2s.centralesupelec.fr 1See [17] for more details.

Combining equations (1) and (2) yields: From a classic control-theoretic viewpoint,
• Equations (6) yields a system (Σ) with a single input
e˙ + K e = 0
P
u = T and a single output y = T (see also Figure
Air,in IT
where F does not appear anymore. Local exponential stabil- 2),
ity is ensured if Kp > 0: • P may be viewed as an external disturbance.
IT
• The gain K is thus easily tuned.
P IV. SOME COMPUTER SIMULATIONS
• Robustness with respect to different types of distur-
A. Basic facts
bances and model uncertainties is achieved.
The following values of the parameters are inspired by
Remark 3: See [17] for a discussion about the equivalence
[13]: α = 2.7248, α = − 32.6975, α = 4.2997.103,
between the iP (2) and proportional-integralcontrollers (PIs). 11 12 21
α = 2.9632.104, α = 537.4670, α = 131.6406, α =
22 31 32 41
C. Real-time estimation of F
514.2857, α = 153.5354, α = 335.9169, α = 7.7166,
42 51 52
The term F in Equation (1) is estimated in real-time α = 12, α = 9.6000. Following again [13], the output y
61 62
◦
according to recent algebraic identification techniques [19]. of System (Σ) is assumed to track the setpoint 20.9 (degree
It may be assumed to be “well” approximated by a piecewise Celsius). In Formulae (1)-(2), set α = 10, K = 1. The
p
constant function Fˆ (see, e.g., [10]). Rewrite then Equation sampling period is 1 min.
(1) in the operational domain (see, e.g., [42]): Remark 4: Note that forecasting results via time series
were used in [13]. They become pointless here.
Φ
B. Four preliminary scenarios
sY = + αU + y(0) (3)
s
1) Sudden CPU load change: Figure 3-(a) exhibits a
where Φ is a constant. We get rid of the initial condition
sudden change of the CPU load P . Figure 3-(d) shows
y(0) by multiplying both sides on the left by d : IT
ds that the setpoint is well tracked.
dY Φ dU 2) A more realistic CPU load change: It is given by lna-
Y + s = − + α (4)
ds s2 ds gral, i.e., the Company to which two authors, M. Bekcheva
and A. Moradi, belong, and is depicted in Figure 4-(a).
Noise attenuation is achieved by multiplying both sides on
s−2. Figures 4-(d) confirms a great tracking.
the left by It yields in the time domain the real-time
estimate, thanks to the equivalence between d and the 3) Sudden temperature change: Figure 5-(b) exhibits a
ds
multiplication by −t, sudden temperature of the data center temperature T out. Here
again Figure 5-(d) depicts an excellent tracking.
t
6
Fˆ (t) = − [(τ − 2σ)y(σ) + ασ(τ − σ)u(σ)]dσ 4) Another reference trajectory: Some situations may ne-
τ3 Z t−τ cessitate, contrarily to Section IV-A, to replace the setpoint,
(5)
i.e., a constant reference trajectory, by a more general one. As
where τ > 0 might be quite “small.”
demonstrated by Figure 6, the tracking remains exceptional.
III. A SIMPLE MATHEMATICAL MODEL FOR
COMPUTER SIMULATIONS C. Sudden model change
Our model, which is essential for computer simulations,
Represent a sudden model change at time t = 2.7 h by
is to a great extent borrowed from [13]. Figures 1-(a) and multiplying α , α , α in Equations (6) by 0.5 and 1.5.2
21 31 51
1-(b) represent respectively the server air flow circulation
If those changes would occur at time t = 0, they should
and the simplified data center. Figure 2 is sketching the
be interpreted as a model mismatch. The variables P and
IT
controller and permits to define various important variables.
T remain unaltered and constant. Although the model-
out
Basic thermodynamic laws lead to the differential equations
free control synthesis of Section IV-A remains unchanged,
Figures 7 et 8 display excellent performances.
T˙ = α P − α (T − T )
IT 11 IT 12 IT Rack V. CONCLUSION
 T˙ = α (T − T ) + α (T − T )
 Rack 21 cAisle Rack 22 IT Rack The power usage effectiveness, or PUE, of data cen-

 T˙ = α (T − T ) + α (T − T )
 cAisle 31 Air,in cAisle 32 cAisle cWall ters, although heavily criticized [24], seems to be the only


 T˙ = α (T − T ) + α (T − T ) measure for checking the energy saving quality today. It
cWall 41 out cWall 42 cWall cAisle
T˙ = α (T − T ) + α (T − T ) would however be meaningless to try applying this indicator
 hAisle 51 Rack hAisle 52 hAisle hWall

   T˙ hWall = α 61(T out − T hWall) + α 62(T hWall − T hAisle) here, in the context of such a paper. Section IV, which
 demonstrates that the tracking works well in rather stringent
 (6)

conditions, may convince the reader that our approach should
where
be nevertheless quite efficient with respect to energy saving.
• P is the input power which corresponds to the CPU
IT
The most important for future developments is of course the
load,
• T (resp. T ) is the control (resp. output) variable,
Air,in IT 2In accordance with [13], those variations may be justified by the change
• α are suitable parameters. of a coefficient called κ.
ij

(a) Air flow (b) Pictures
Fig. 1: A simplified data center
tuptuOecnerefeR
lortnoC
+
Model-free
- control
yrotcejart
Fig. 2: Control scheme
application of our method to real data. A positive outcome [6] A. Beghi, L. Cecchinato, G. Dalla Mana, M. Lionello, M. Rampazzo,
would lead to a critical simplification of the HVAC control E. Sisti, “Modelling and control of a free cooling system for data
centers,” Energ. Proc., vol. 140, pp. 447-457, 2017.
management of data centers:
[7] M. Bekcheva, M. Fliess, C. Join, A. Moradi, H. Mounier, “Meilleure
• irrelevance of complex and time-consuming mathemat- e´lasticite´ “nuagique” par commande sans mode`le,” ISTE OpenSci.
ical modeling, which is inherently uncertain, Automat., vol. 2. 15 p., 2018.
• forthright tuning. https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01884806/en/
[8] A. Beloglazov, J. Abawajy, R. Buyya, “Energy-aware resource allo-
Promising experiments with a greenhouse [30] and a building
cation heuristics for efficient management of data centers for Cloud
[33] comfort this hope. It would confirm thanks also to [7] computing,” Future Generat. Comput. Syst., vol. 28, pp. 755-768,
2012.
that model-freecontrol should become important in computer
[9] A. Benoit, L. Lefe`vre, A.-C. Orgerie, I. Ra¨ıs, “Reducing the energy
science (compare with [3], [23], [25]).
consumption of large scale computing systems through combined
shutdown policies with multiple constraints,” Int. J. High Perform.
REFERENCES
Comput. Appl., vol. 32, pp. 176-188, 2018.
[1] H. Aboua¨ıssa, O. Alhaj Hasan, C. Join, M. Fliess, D. Defer, “Energy [10] N. Bourbaki, Fonctions d’une variable re´elle, Hermann, 1976. English
saving for building heating via a simple and efficient model-free translation: Functions of a Real Variable, Springer, 2004.
control design: First steps with computer simulations,” 21st Int. Conf.
[11] A. Capozzolia, G. Primiceria, “Cooling systems in data centers: state
Syst. Theor. Contr. Comput., Sinaia, 2017.
of art and emerging technologies,” Energy Proc., vol. 83, pp. 484-493,
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01568899/en/ 2015.
[2] M.Armbrust, A.Fox, R.Griffith, A.D.Joseph, R.Katz, A.Konwinski,
[12] C. Conficoni, A. Bartolini, A. Tilli, C. Cavazzoni, L. Benini, “In-
G. Lee, D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, M. Zaharia, “A view on
tegrated energy-aware management of supercomputer hybrid cooling
cloud computing,” Comm. ACM, vol. 53, pp. 50-58, 2010.
systems,” IEEETrans. Indust. Informat., vol. 12, pp. 1299-1311, 2016.
[3] K.J. A˚stro¨m, R.M. Murray, Feedback Systems, Princeton University
[13] L. Cupelli, T. Schu¨tz , P. Jahangiri, M. Fuchs , A. Monti, D. Mu¨ller,
Press, 2008.
“Data center control strategy for participation in demand response
[4] O. Bara, M. Fliess, C. Join, J. Day, S.M. Djouadi, “Toward a model-
programs,” IEEE Trans. Indust. Informat., vol. 14, pp. 5087-5099,
free feedback control synthesis for treating acute inflammation,” J.
2018.
Theoret. Biology, vol. 448, pp. 26-37, 2018.
[5] O. Bara, M. Olama, S. Djouadi, T. Kuruganti, M. Fliess, C. Join, [14] B. Durand-Estebe, C. Le Bota, J.N. Mancos, E´. Arquis, “Data center
“Model-free load control for high penetration of solar photovoltaic optimization using PID regulation in CFD simulations,” Energ. Build-
generation,” 49th North Amer. Power Symp., Morgantown, 2017. ings, vol.66, pp. 154-164, 2013.
[15] B. Durand-Estebe, C. Le Bota, J.N. Mancos, E´. Arquis, “Simulation
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-01558647/en/

14.5 26
14 25.8
25.6
13.5
25.4
13
25.2
12.5
25
12
24.8
11.5
24.6
11
24.4
10.5 24.2
10 24
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Time in hour Time in hour
(a) Power consumption: CPU load P (kW)(b) Data center emperature T (degree Cel-
IT out
sius)
18.5 21.2
18
21
17.5
17 20.8
16.5
20.6
16
15.5 20.4
15
20.2
14.5
14 20
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Time in hour Time in hour
(c) Control variable T (degree Celsius) (d) Output variable T (degree Celsius)
Air,in IT
Fig. 3: Sudden CPU load change
16 26
25.8
15.5
25.6
15
25.4
14.5
25.2
14 25
24.8
13.5
24.6
13
24.4
12.5
24.2
12 24
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Time in hour Time in hour
(a) Power consumption: CPU load P (kW)(b) Data center temperature T (degree Cel-
IT out
sius)
17.5 21
20.9
17
20.8
16.5
20.7
16
20.6
15.5 20.5
20.4
15
20.3
14.5
20.2
14
20.1
13.5 20
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Time in hour Time in hour
(c) Control variable T (degree Celsius) (d) Output variable T (degree Celsius)
Air,in IT
Fig. 4: Realistic CPU load change
of a temperature adaptive control strategy for an IWSE economizer in Engin., vol. 13, pp. 1557-1566, 2016.
a data center,” App. Energ., vol. 134, pp. 45-56, 2014.
[17] M. Fliess, C. Join, “Model-free control,” Int. J. Contr. vol. 86, pp.
2228-2252, 2013.
[16] Q. Fang, J. Wang, Q. Gong, “QoS-driven power management of data
centers via model predictive control,” IEEE Trans. Automat. Sci. [18] M. Fliess, C. Join, M. Beckheva, A. Moradi, H. Mounier, “Easily

| 0                                 | 1                                 |
|:----------------------------------|:----------------------------------|
| 14.5                              | 26                                |
| 14                                | 25.8                              |
| 13.5                              | 25.6                              |
| 13                                | 25.4                              |
| 12.5                              | 25.2                              |
| 12                                | 25                                |
| 11.5                              | 24.8                              |
| 11                                | 24.6                              |
| 10.5                              | 24.4                              |
| 100 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 | 24.2                              |
| Time in hour                      | 240 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 |
|                                   | Time in hour                      |

|    |
|:---|
|    |

| 0                                 | 1                                 |
|:----------------------------------|:----------------------------------|
| 18.5                              | 21.2                              |
| 18                                | 21                                |
| 17.5                              | 20.8                              |
| 17                                | 20.6                              |
| 16.5                              | 20.4                              |
| 16                                | 20.2                              |
| 15.5                              | 200 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 |
| 15                                | Time in hour                      |
| 14.5                              |                                   |
| 140 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 |                                   |
| Time in hour                      |                                   |

|    |
|:---|
|    |

| 0                                  | 1                                  |
|:-----------------------------------|:-----------------------------------|
| 16                                 | 26                                 |
| 15.5                               | 25.8                               |
| 15                                 | 25.6                               |
| 14.5                               | 25.4                               |
| 14                                 | 25.2                               |
| 13.5                               | 25                                 |
| 13                                 | 24.8                               |
| 12.5                               | 24.6                               |
| 120 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 | 24.4                               |
| Time in hour                       | 24.2                               |
|                                    | 240 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 |
|                                    | Time in hour                       |

|    |
|:---|
|    |

| 0                                    | 1                                  |
|:-------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------|
| 17.5                                 | 21                                 |
| 17                                   | 20.9                               |
| 16.5                                 | 20.8                               |
| 16                                   | 20.7                               |
| 15.5                                 | 20.6                               |
| 15                                   | 20.5                               |
| 14.5                                 | 20.4                               |
| 14                                   | 20.3                               |
| 13.50 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 | 20.2                               |
| Time in hour                         | 20.1                               |
|                                      | 200 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 |
|                                      | Time in hour                       |

|    |
|:---|
|    |

13.5 27
26.5
13 26
25.5
12.5 25
24.5
12 24
23.5
11.5 23
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Time in hour Time in hour
(a) Power consumption: CPU load P (kW)(b) Data center temperature T (degree Cel-
IT out
sius)
18 21
20.9
17.5
20.8
17
20.7
16.5
20.6
16 20.5
20.4
15.5
20.3
15
20.2
14.5
20.1
14 20
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Time in hour Time in hour
(c) Control variable T (degree Celsius) (d) Output variable T (degree Celsius)
Air,in IT
Fig. 5: Sudden temperature change
13.5 26
25.8
25.6
13
25.4
25.2
12.5 25
24.8
24.6
12
24.4
24.2
11.5 24
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Time in hour Time in hour
(a) Power consumption: CPU load P (kW)(b) Data center temperature T (degree Cel-
IT out
sius)
18 21.6
17.5 21.4
21.2
17
21
16.5
20.8
16
20.6
15.5
20.4
15 20.2
14.5 20
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Time in hour Time in hour
(c) Control variable T (degree Celsius) (d) Output variable T (degree Celsius)
Air,in IT
Fig. 6: Another reference trajectory
implementable time series forecasting techniques for resource provi- for continuous-time linear systems via new algebraic techniques,” H.
sioning in cloud computing,” 6th Int. Conf. Contr. Decis. Informat. Garnier, L. Wang (Eds): Identification of Continuous-time Models
Techno., Paris, 2019. from Sampled Data, pp. 362–391, Springer, 2008.
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02024835/en/
[19] M. Fliess, H. Sira-Ram´ırez, “Closed-loop parametric identification [20] M. Fliess, C. Join, C. Voyant, “Prediction bands for solar energy: New

| 0                                   | 1                                 |
|:------------------------------------|:----------------------------------|
| 13.5                                | 27                                |
| 13                                  | 26.5                              |
| 12.5                                | 26                                |
| 12                                  | 25.5                              |
| 11.50 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 | 25                                |
| Time in hour                        | 24.5                              |
|                                     | 24                                |
|                                     | 23.5                              |
|                                     | 230 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 |
|                                     | Time in hour                      |

|    |
|:---|
|    |

| 0                                 | 1                                 |
|:----------------------------------|:----------------------------------|
| 18                                | 21                                |
| 17.5                              | 20.9                              |
| 17                                | 20.8                              |
| 16.5                              | 20.7                              |
| 16                                | 20.6                              |
| 15.5                              | 20.5                              |
| 15                                | 20.4                              |
| 14.5                              | 20.3                              |
| 140 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 | 20.2                              |
| Time in hour                      | 20.1                              |
|                                   | 200 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 |
|                                   | Time in hour                      |

|    |
|:---|
|    |

| 0                                   | 1                                 |
|:------------------------------------|:----------------------------------|
| 13.5                                | 26                                |
| 13                                  | 25.8                              |
| 12.5                                | 25.6                              |
| 12                                  | 25.4                              |
| 11.50 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 | 25.2                              |
| Time in hour                        | 25                                |
|                                     | 24.8                              |
|                                     | 24.6                              |
|                                     | 24.4                              |
|                                     | 24.2                              |
|                                     | 240 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 |
|                                     | Time in hour                      |

|    |
|:---|
|    |

|    |
|:---|
|    |

| 0                                   | 1                                 |
|:------------------------------------|:----------------------------------|
| 18                                  | 21.6                              |
| 17.5                                | 21.4                              |
| 17                                  | 21.2                              |
| 16.5                                | 21                                |
| 16                                  | 20.8                              |
| 15.5                                | 20.6                              |
| 15                                  | 20.4                              |
| 14.50 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 | 20.2                              |
| Time in hour                        | 200 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 |
|                                     | Time in hour                      |

18 21
20.9
17.5
20.8
17 20.7
20.6
16.5
20.5
16
20.4
15.5 20.3
20.2
15
20.1
14.5 20
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Time in hour Time in hour
(a) Control variable T (degree Celsius) (b) Output variable T (degree Celsius)
Air,in IT
Fig. 7: Parameters change: × 1.5
21 21
20.9
20
20.8
19 20.7
20.6
18
20.5
17
20.4
16 20.3
20.2
15
20.1
14 20
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Time in hour Time in hour
(a) Control variable T (degree Celsius) (b) Output variable T (degree Celsius)
Air,in IT
Fig. 8: Parameter change: × 0.5
short-term time series forecasting techniques,” Solar Energ., vol. 166, [34] E. Pakbaznia, M. Pedram,, “Minimizing data center cooling and server
pp. 519-528, 2018. power costs,”ACM/IEEEInt.Symp.LowPowerElectron. Design,San
[21] Y. Fu, W. Zuo, M. Wetter, J.W. VanGilder, X. Han, D. Plamondond, Francisco, 2009.
“Equation-based object-oriented modeling and simulation for data [35] L. Parolini, B. Sinopoli, B.H. Krogh, Z. Wang, “A cyber-physical
center cooling: A case study,” Ener. Build., vol. 186, pp. 108-125, systems approach to data center modeling and control,” Proc. IEEE,
2019. vol. 100, pp. 254-268, 2012. for Energy Efficiency
[22] K. Hamiche, M. Fliess, C. Join, H. Aboua¨ıssa, “Bullwhip effect [36] D. Paul, W.-D. Zhong, S.K. Bose, “Demand response in data centers
attenuation in supply chain management via control-theoretic tools through energy-efficient scheduling and simple incentivization,” IEEE
and short-term forecasts: A preliminary study with an application to Syst. J., vol. 11, pp. 613-624, 2017.
perishable inventories,” 6th Int. Conf. Contr. Decis. Informat. Techno., [37] B. Qureshi, “Profile-based power-aware workflow scheduling frame-
Paris, 2019. work for energy-efficient data centers,” Future Generat. Comput. Syst.,
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02050480/en/
vol. 94, pp. 453-467, 2019.
[23] J.L. Hellerstein, Y. Diao, S. Parekh, D.M. Tilbury, Feedback Control
[38] H. Rong, H. Zhang, S. Xiao, C. Li, C. Hu, “Optimizing energy
of Computing Systems, Wiley, 2004.
consumption for data centers,” Renew. Sustain. Energ. Rev., vol. 58,
[24] N. Horner, I. Azevedo, “Power usage effectiveness in data centers:
pp. 674-691, 2018.
overloaded and underachieving,” Electr. J., vol. 29, pp. 61-69, 2016.
[39] B. Telsang, S. Djouadi, M. Olama, T. Kuruganti, J. Dong, Y. Xue,
[25] P.K. Janert, Feedback Control for Computer Systems, O’Reilly Media,
Model-free control of building HVAC systems to accommodate so-
2014.
lar photovoltaic energy, IEEE Int. Symp. Power Electron. Distribut.
[26] T. Jiang, L. Yu, Y. Cao, Energy Management of Internet Data Centers
Generat. Syst. (PEDG), Charlotte, NC, 2018.
in Smart Grid, Springer, 2015.
[40] F. Terraneo, A. Leva, W. Fornaciari, “Event-Based Thermal Control
[27] N. Jones, “How to stop data centres from gobbling up the world’s
for High Power Density Microprocessors,” W. Fornaciari, D. Soudris
electricity,” Nature, vol. 561, pp. 163-168, 2018.
(Eds): Harnessing Performance Variability in Embedded and High-
[28] Y. Joshi, P. Kumar (Eds), Energy Efficient Thermal Management of
performance Many/Multi-core Platforms, pp. 107-127, Springer, 2019.
Data Centers, Springer, 2012.
[41] J. Yao, X. Liu, C. Zhang, “Predictive electricity cost minimization
[29] J. Khazaii, Energy-Efficient HVAC Design, Springer, 2014.
through energy buffering in data centers,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid,
[30] F. Lafont, J.-F. Balmat, N. Pessel, M. Fliess, “A model-free control
vol. 5, pp. 230-238, 2014.
strategy for an experimental greenhouse with an application to fault
[42] K. Yosida, Operational Calculus (translated from the Japanese),
accommodation,” Comput. Electron. Agricul., 110, pp. 139-149, 2015.
Springer, 1984.
[31] N. Lazic, T. Lu, C. Boutilier, M. Ryu, E. Wong, B. Roy, G. Imwalle, [43] J. Wang, Q. Zhang, S. Yoon, Y. Yu, “Impact of uncertainties on the
“Data center cooling using model-predictive control,” 32nd Conf. supervisory control performance of a hybrid cooling system in data
Neural Inform. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS), Montre´al, 2018. center,” Building Environ., vol. 148, pp. 361-371, 2019.
[32] C. Lee, R. Chen, “Optimal self-tuning PID controller based on low [44] C. Wu, R. Buyya, Cloud Data Centers and Cost Modeling, Morgan
power consumption for a server fan cooling system,” Sensors, vol. 15, Kaufmann, 2015.
11685-11700, 2015.; [45] R. Zhou, Z. Wang, C.E. Bash, A. McReynolds, C. Hoover, R. Shih, N.
[33] I.T. Michailidis, T. Schild, R. Sangi, P. Michailidis, C. Korkas, J. Kumari, R.K.Sharma, “Aholistic and optimal approach for data center
Fu¨tterer, Dirk Mu¨ller, E.B. Kosmatopoulos, “Energy-efficient HVAC cooling management,” Amer. Contr. Conf., San Francisco, 2011.
management using cooperative, self-trained, control agents: A real-life
German building case study,” App. Ener., vol. 211, pp. 113-125, 2018.

| 0                                   | 1                                 |
|:------------------------------------|:----------------------------------|
| 18                                  | 21                                |
| 17.5                                | 20.9                              |
| 17                                  | 20.8                              |
| 16.5                                | 20.7                              |
| 16                                  | 20.6                              |
| 15.5                                | 20.5                              |
| 15                                  | 20.4                              |
| 14.50 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 | 20.3                              |
| Time in hour                        | 20.2                              |
|                                     | 20.1                              |
|                                     | 200 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 |
|                                     | Time in hour                      |

|    |
|:---|
|    |

| 0                                 | 1                                 |
|:----------------------------------|:----------------------------------|
| 21                                | 21                                |
| 20                                | 20.9                              |
| 19                                | 20.8                              |
| 18                                | 20.7                              |
| 17                                | 20.6                              |
| 16                                | 20.5                              |
| 15                                | 20.4                              |
| 140 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 | 20.3                              |
| Time in hour                      | 20.2                              |
|                                   | 20.1                              |
|                                   | 200 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 |
|                                   | Time in hour                      |

|    |
|:---|
|    |