Project build guide
Acknowledgement
• We would like to thank JetBrains for their donating licenses to their excellent products to de‑
velop Salvia.
• In this project we are using:
– PyCharm
– CLion
– Reshaper C++
Requirements and build steps
Prerequisites for ALL platforms
• Git with LFS
• CMake 3.23+
• vcpkg
Note: CMake and Git may installed with OS, IDEs or build essentials. Please check the installed ver‑
sions and the activated toolchains.
Windows 10/11
1. Install latest Visual Studio 2022 with C++, CMake, and Git.
2. Install vcpkg side‑by‑side with source code. For example, if your project is located at D
:\path\salvia, then vcpkg should be installed at D:\path\vcpkg. Otherwise, you
need to specify the vcpkg toolchain file by the config _windows/toolchainFile in
CMakePreset_Woodblocks.json.
3. Open the folder D:\path\salvia with Visual Studio 2022
4. Select the preset msvc_dbg_win or msvc_rel_win in the CMake Presets tab and build it.
1

Linux/WSL
1. gcc above 12.0 or clang above 14.0 is required
2. Clone the project to path-to-salvia.
3. Install vcpkg by your OS package system (for e.g. apt on ubuntu). The default installation path
of vcpkg is at ~/vcpkg. If it was installed elsewhere, you need to specify the vcpkg toolchain
file by the config _linux/toolchainFile in CMakePreset_Woodblocks.json.
4. Open the folder path-to-salvia with your IDE (VSCode, VIM or CLion).
NOTE for CLion on WSL: If you are working on WSL with CLion, please make sure that the correct
CMakeandGitandcompilerinCLionwasselected. YoucancheckoreditthetoolchainsinSettings
> Build, Execution, Deployment > Toolchains.
Mac
1. Install latest XCode Commad Line Tools.
2. gcc above 12.0 or clang above 14.0 is required.
3. Clone the project to path-to-salvia.
4. InstallvcpkgbyyourOSpackagesystem(fore.g.brewonMac). Thedefaultinstallationpathof
vcpkg is at ~/Library/vcpkg. If it was installed elsewhere, you need to specify the vcpkg
toolchain file by the config _macos/toolchainFile in CMakePreset_Woodblocks.
json.
5. Open the folder path-to-salvia with your IDE (VSCode, VIM or CLion).
NOTE for CLion on Mac: Please download M1 version of CLion if you are using M1 Mac. Otherwise,
you may encounter some issues when building the project.
Suggestions for IDEs
• Windows: We recommend using Visual Studio 2022 and open salvia as folder. VSCode is also
available,butonlytheofficialC++intellisensepluginwassupportedwhenbuildwithMSVCand
its experience is relatively bad.
• Linux/WSL: CLion is our recommended IDE. If you are using VSCode, we suggest use clangd as
the language server. For your convience, the build script generates compile_commands.
json and copy to root for clangd by default. And we also highly recommend you to install
clang-tidy and clang-format for better code quality.
• Mac: Same as Linux.
2

Known issues
AllinteractivedemosarenotsupportedonLinuxandMacbecausewedon’thaveGUIsupportonthese
platforms.
Support Info
If you have any question, please contact: wuye9036 at gmail dot com
3