 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WUR_MSc_DMP_TemplateAndGuidance_v01 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author(s):     Irene Verhagen  
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-5588-1333 
Luc Steinbuch 
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6484-0920  
 
 
 
Date:     20240726 
Organization:  Wageningen University & Research  
https://ror.org/04qw24q55 
 
Licence:     
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/  

     
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
WUR data management plan template for MSc students 
❖  Use this template to fill in a data management plan (DMP) for your MSc thesis.  
❖  You are free to add topics to this template to better align with your MSc thesis. 
However, the original topics must be retained.  
❖  To get to additional information in the appendix for each section, hold keyboard 
key CTRL + left-click [info] or right-click [info] and select ‘open hyperlink’.  
❖  For  more  information,  visit  the  WUR  research  data  management  website: 
https://www.wur.eu/rdm.  
❖  For questions or a review of your DMP, contact your supervisor and / or the  
data steward of the chair group.  
❖  If further support is required, contact data@wur.nl.  
❖  Please note that questions can have multiple answers checked where 
applicable. 
❖  Make  sure  to  attach  the  DMP  to  your  MSc  thesis  proposal  upon 
submission. 
   
1 
 

     
 
A. Describe the MSc thesis [info]
 
 
1.  Your name and master program: 
 
 
 
  
 
 
2.  Describe the organisational context of your MSc thesis.  
 
Course code of your thesis   
Date of finalising this DMP    
Chair group(s)    
Other organisation(s) involved (when   
applicable) 
Supervisor / co-supervisor    
Start date of MSc thesis    
Planned end date of MSc thesis   
Umbrella project number (when    
applicable) 
 
 
3.  Give a short description of your MSc thesis.  
 
(Working) title    
Summary    
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
2 
 

|    | Course code of your thesis           |    |    |
|:---|:-------------------------------------|:---|:---|
|    | Date of finalising this DMP          |    |    |
|    | Chair group(s)                       |    |    |
|    | Other organisation(s) involved (when |    |    |
|    | applicable)                          |    |    |
|    | Supervisor / co-supervisor           |    |    |
|    | Start date of MSc thesis             |    |    |
|    | Planned end date of MSc thesis       |    |    |
|    | Umbrella project number (when        |    |    |
|    | applicable)                          |    |    |

|         | (Working) title   |    |    |
|:--------|:------------------|:---|:---|
| Summary | Summary           |    |    |

     
 
4.  List  the  individuals  and  /  or  parties  responsible  for  the  following  data 
management tasks (e.g. you, your supervisor(s) and / or the data steward). 
 
Writing this DMP    
Supervising this DMP   
Reviewing this DMP (name   
supervisor(s) and / or data steward) 
+ date of consultation 
Data collection   
Data quality    
Storage and backup    
Data archiving / publishing    
Any other role [......]    
 
 
B. Describe the data to be collected, software used, file formats 
and data size [info]
 
  
5.  Will you reuse existing data for your MSc thesis?  
 
☐ Yes. Please specify below where you will get the data from (e.g. DOI, URL, or storage 
location) and the terms of use (i.e. a written statement on how you are allowed to use the 
data).  
☐ No.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 

|    | Writing this DMP                     |    |    |
|:---|:-------------------------------------|:---|:---|
|    | Supervising this DMP                 |    |    |
|    | Reviewing this DMP (name             |    |    |
|    | supervisor(s) and / or data steward) |    |    |
|    | + date of consultation               |    |    |
|    | Data collection                      |    |    |
|    | Data quality                         |    |    |
|    | Storage and backup                   |    |    |
|    | Data archiving / publishing          |    |    |
|    | Any other role [......]              |    |    |

     
 
6.  Will new data be produced during your MSc thesis?  
 
☐ Yes.  
☐ No. 
 
 
7.  Please describe in the table below all the data you need to store. This includes 
generated as well as reused existing data and code files that you manage and 
store. This information is useful – amongst others - to get an overview of how 
much storage space is needed. 
 
File contents  Data type  Software   (Open) file format  Estimated  Estimated 
size of each  number of 
file (range)  files 
(range) 
(e.g. lab analysis,  (e.g. numerical)  (e.g. Excel)  (e.g. .csv)  (e.g. 20 – 50  (e.g. 50 – 
gene sequence,  Mb)  100) 
interviews, lesion 
scores, etc.) 
              
              
              
           
 
 
C. Structuring research data and information [info]  
 
8.  Give a (visual) representation of the folder structure you intend to use. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 

| File contents       | Data type        | Software     | (Open) file format   | Estimated      |            | Estimated   |    |
|                     |                  |              |                      | size of each   |            |             |    |
|                     |                  |              |                      | file (range)   |            |             |    |
|:--------------------|:-----------------|:-------------|:---------------------|:---------------|:-----------|:------------|:---|
|                     |                  |              |                      |                |            | number of   |    |
|                     |                  |              |                      |                |            | files       |    |
|                     |                  |              |                      |                |            | (range)     |    |
| (e.g. lab analysis, | (e.g. numerical) | (e.g. Excel) | (e.g. .csv)          | (e.g. 20 – 50  | (e.g. 50 – |             |    |
| gene sequence,      |                  |              |                      | Mb)            | 100)       |             |    |
| interviews, lesion  |                  |              |                      |                |            |             |    |
| scores, etc.)       |                  |              |                      |                |            |             |    |

| Estimated    |
|:-------------|
| size of each |
| file (range) |

     
 
9.  Describe  the  file  naming  conventions  you  intend  to  use.  Please  give  one  or 
multiple example(s). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10.  How will you distinguish between versions of files? 
 
☐ Dates within file names are updated when files are modified. 
☐ The designation ‘vRAW’ is added to file names that contain raw unaltered data (before any 
processing and cleaning). Any alteration of RAW data is done on a copy of the RAW data and 
appended with a version number which increases with each file modification (e.g. v01, v02, 
v03, etc.). 
☐ We will use Git versioning for code / scripts. 
☐ Other, please specify below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 

     
 
D. Storing data, code and readme file [info] 
 
11.  Where will you store the data, code and readme file during your thesis? Include 
platforms you use to share data (e.g. with your supervisor), collect data on, or 
send data to for processing or analysis. This includes any used external hardware 
or computers. 
 
☐ WUR OneDrive for Business (automatic backup and possibility to share with supervisors, 
which is strongly advised). 
☐ Git@WUR (GitLab locally hosted at WUR; dedicated to saving and updating programming 
code). 
☐ A WUR storage solution, organised by my supervisor (e.g. W:drive, Yoda@WUR, 
Sharepoint, MS Teams). Please, specify. 
☐ Other, please specify.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Personal or otherwise sensitive data [info] 
 
12.  Do you collect / process personal data or otherwise sensitive data for your MSc 
thesis?  
 
☐ Yes. 
☐ No. Please, continue to question 15. 
 
 
   
6 
 

     
 
13.  Please specify the privacy or sensitive data protection measures. Think of data 
minimisation,  pseudonymisation  /  anonymisation  /  informed  consent  forms / 
separate storage / access management).    
 
 
 
 
 
 
14.  Are there other ethical issues (e.g. when working with animals or when working 
with people in a medical setting) that need to be considered and for which your 
supervisor needed approval from ethical committees?  
 
☐ My supervisor indicates that further ethical approval is not required. 
☐ My supervisor requested approval at the appropriate ethical committee(s).  
 
F. Preserving data, code and readme file [info] 
 
15.  Where at WUR will the data, code and readme file from your MSc thesis be 
archived when finished?     
 
☐ Data will be send to my supervisor via SURFfilesender and archived on the W:drive.  
☐ I have been provided with access to Yoda@WUR where the data will be archived.  
☐ Other, please specify below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
 

     
 
G. Discussion points for / with supervisor(s) [info] 
 
For the following discussion points, please have a look at the guidance. When 
applicable, any agreements etc. can be written down in the fields below. 
 
☐ Intellectual Property rights.  
 
 
 
 
☐ Data rightholder(s) and access.  
 
 
 
 
☐ Publishing data and choosing a licence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
8 
 

     
 
Guidance: additional information (may be deleted after completion) 
 
A guidance. Describe the MSc thesis. 
 
1.  Name MSc student and master programme.  
Please add your full name and the master programme you follow. 
 
2.  Organisational context of your MSc thesis 
A data management plan should always include contextual information. Then, it is 
clear to whom / which MSc thesis the filled in data management plan belongs and to 
which data the described data management practices apply. Please, add the chair 
group(s)  your  MSc  thesis  is  affiliated  with.  Please  carefully  check  the  spelling. 
Preferably copy and paste directly from aforementioned website. 
 
3.  Description of your MSc thesis 
Providing the (working) title and a short description of your MSc thesis helps the 
reader to understand your work and put the description of management of research 
data into context. 
 
4.  Data management responsibilities 
Identifying  persons  or  parties  who  play  a  role  in  your  daily  data  management 
practices helps to clarify the data collection process. Identifying these roles are also 
important  after  completion  of  your  MSc  thesis.  For  example,  for  long-term 
accessibility of the data, responsibility for the archived data should lie with more than 
one person. Feel free to add roles. 
 
 
B guidance. Describe the data to be collected, software used, file 
formats and data size 
 
5.  Reuse existing data 
When  others  generate  data,  whether  archived  at  e.g.  WUR  or  published  in  a 
repository, this gives you the opportunity to reuse these data within your MSc thesis. 
However, make sure that you are aware of the terms of use (e.g. the licence) of the 
data that you want to reuse. The terms of use provide you with what you are allowed 
to do with the data. Want to find existing data? Have a look here for places to start.  
9 
 

     
 
 
In the case of not reusing data: think of the following potential reasons why the reuse 
of existing data was considered, but not implemented. Is the data you want to reuse 
not publicly available or otherwise restricted in access? Is the data not yet collected? 
Would the costs be too high (e.g. acquiring specific software)? Is the data too big in 
size (e.g. TBs)? 
 
6.  New data 
Indicate whether you will collect / generate new data in the research project. 
 
7.  Description newly generated data. 
Data type refers to whether the data can be classified as for example textual, numeric, 
audio, film etc. Note that data includes any processing or analysis scripts, protocols, 
or any other output resulting from research (figures, statistical output, processed 
data etc.). Try to use software that let you also save files in an open format, so that 
others can open the files (now and in the future) even if they don’t have the software. 
Providing the estimated number of files and file size helps to indicate for example the 
storage requirements and costs. 
 
 
C guidance. Structuring research data and information  
 
8.  Folder structure  
Designing a logical folder structure (for tips, see here) ensures that you and e.g. your 
supervisor can easily locate data now and in the future. Provide how you plan to 
organise your (sub)folders. If you already have a folder structure in place, instead of 
having to go through the whole folder structure and write it down is via the following 
powershell workflow (note: the following steps do not work with zip files): 
 
-  Go to your file explorer 
-  Open the parent folder 
-  In the address bar, type and press enter afterwards: powershell 
-  A blue screen pops up. Continue in that screen 
-  Type and press enter afterwards: Get-ChildItem | tree > foldertree.txt 
-  There is now a file your folder [foldertree.txt], from which you can copy the 
content in the answer field.  
 
10 
 

     
 
If you’re using Git Bash on Windows, go to your parent directory (or Main local Git 
directory) and use: 
 
-  cmd //c tree //a > foldertree.txt 
-  There is now a file in your folder [foldertree.txt], from which you can copy 
the content in the answer field.  
 
If you are using Linux: 
 
-  sudo apt install tree. 
-  Go to your project parent directory. 
-  tree -d > foldertree.txt 
-  There is now a file in your folder [foldertree.txt], from which you can copy   
the content in the answer field. 
 
9.  File naming conventions  
Applying a consistent and descriptive file naming convention (i.e. a systematic file 
naming method) helps to identify the content of a (data)file without opening it, 
easily and quickly locate, retrieve and filter (data)files, even if they have changed 
folders and easily sort and browse through your (data)files. When creating a file 
name convention, consider the following (more tips here): 
 
-  Keep file names short (max. 30-35 characters).  
-   Use abbreviations to avoid long file names.  
-  Using the international standard for date (YYYYMMDD). 
-  Apply a leading zero to the version number (e.g. v01). 
-  Avoid using spaces, periods and special characters. Use dashes and / or 
underscores instead. 
 
A basic example of a file name:  
  [project]_[filesubject]_[subsubject]_[date]_[version].[extension]  
   
 
 
10.  File versioning 
Make sure that you have a system in place to keep track of file versions. A simple 
and effective system is to incorporate version numbers (e.g. v01, v02 etc.) in your 
11 
 

     
 
file names. Additionally, depending on the type of files you work with, you could use 
systems that keep track of versions of individual files (e.g. OneDrive, Sharepoint) or 
multiple files. For example, Git@WUR, a version control system for code / scripts / 
software which is also available for students. Note: for files in Git, dates and version 
numbers  should  not  be  added  to  the  filenames.  Git  is  version  control  software, 
keeping track of versions for you and without having to apply file versioning yourself. 
When applying versioning by changing file names, Git would not recognise a new 
version as such, but as a completely different file.  
 
 
D guidance. Storing data, code and readme file 
 
11.  Where will data be stored during research.  
Ensure that you store data safely. Safe storage solutions would be for example the 
storage solutions indicated in the WUR data storage finder. Not all storage solutions 
provided by WUR are (directly) accessible for MSc students. We recommend to use 
WUR OneDrive for Business, please see here how to get started / install. When other 
applications are needed to collect / process data, discuss with your supervisor(s) and 
check the ApprovedApps tool. Is the ApprovedApps tool advising against the use of 
the application you chose or not (yet) in the list, discuss with your supervisor how to 
continue. Avoid storing research data on hard disks, USBs, personal laptops (with the 
exception of WUR OneDrive for Business), and third party cloud services such as 
Google Drive and Dropbox (exceptions excluded).  
 
Data  includes  eventual  code  and  always  a  readme  file.  The  readme  file  contains 
information  about  e.g.  the  steps  that  have  been  undertaken  in  processing  and 
analysing data. In short: all information necessary to understand the data, reproduce 
research and verify results. WUR Library advises to use the WUR readme file template 
(DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.7701727) as the minimum required documentation to add to 
the data.  
 
 
 
 
 
E guidance. Personal or otherwise sensitive data 
 
12 
 

     
 
12.  Personal or otherwise sensitive data.  
Working  with  personal  data  (i.e.  any  information  that  (indirectly)  relates  to  an 
identified or identifiable living individual ) or otherwise sensitive data (e.g. financial, 
governmental or company data) requires  a considered approach to data sharing, 
storage, analysis and use. Indicate whether you will collect or process personal or 
otherwise sensitive data for your MSc thesis.  
 
13.  Privacy or sensitive data protection measures.  
Working with personal or other sensitive data (and thus in accordance with the WUR 
policy, laws, privacy law, or GDPR), requires careful processing and storage. Describe 
which protection measures are applied to the data collected / processed for your MSc 
thesis. Examples of protection measures to apply are: 
 
-  Data minimisation; only collect the data necessary for the purpose of the 
MSc thesis. 
-  Informed consent form. 
-  Access management; restricting access to the data to only the persons that 
need to have access (i.e. legitimate users).  
-  Secure data storage and transfer (encryption). 
-  Pseudonymisation or anonymisation. 
 
For more information about information security and privacy, have a look at this page 
or send an email to privacy.student@wur.nl. 
 
14.  Other ethical issues 
Here,  discuss  with  your  supervisor  whether  you  need  or  already  have  ethical 
clearance from e.g. an animal experimental committee or a medical or social ethics 
review committee. 
 
 
 
 
 
F guidance. Preserving of data, code and readme file 
 
15.  Where will the data be preserved 
13 
 

     
 
Where will data be preserved for the long term? Where and if to preserve data also 
depends on its sensitivity. Discuss with your supervisor how and where to preserve 
data.   
 
 
G guidance. Discussion points for / with supervisor(s)
 
 
Intellectual Property Rights 
Getting  intellectual  property  gives  you  the  right  to  benefit  from  your  new  idea, 
innovation or product. The way intellectual property rights (IPR) are regulated by law 
has now been clarified for students. For more information, see this page. Further: 
 
-  Check your IPR position (with your supervisor) before you start your thesis: 
what is laid down in your contract / learning agreement?  
-  Read the IPR guidelines for students. 
-  Conclude clear agreements and record them in writing. 
 
Data rightholder(s) and access 
The party that is the (rights)holder over the data decides what others are allowed to 
do with it. You own the rights to the MSc thesis / Research Practice as stated in the 
Intellectual Property statement in the learning agreement. However, it could be that 
you have been provided with data from e.g. a company. As such, when data is created 
or provided by others, it is important to discuss with them who will be entitled to the 
data  and  what  you  are  allowed  to  do  with  the  data.  A  contract  or  agreement 
addressing data storage, sharing, access, confidentiality etc. might then be involved. 
 
Publishing data and choosing a licence  
Potentially, your MSc thesis results in a scientific article. Then, it is recommended to 
publish the data underlying the article in a data repository. Additionally, data not 
used for a publication can have (future) value for reuse and publishing these data in 
a data repository could be discussed with your supervisor. Data repositories compile, 
manage, preserve, share and provide access to data, metadata and documentation. 
Publishing the data and readme file in a data repository promotes data reuse and 
verifiability. Already, discuss in which repository data could be published (more info, 
see this page). Also discuss under which licence the data may be reused by others. 
Check the commonly used Creative Commons licences. WUR Library advices the CC 
BY licence for data, because WUR adheres to the motto 'as open as possible, as closed 
14 
 

     
 
a necessary' and researchers should at least be attributed for their scientific effort. 
CC BY means that other researchers should credit you as a creator of the data. 
 
Before publishing data, take the following into account: 
 
-  Is (part of) the data personal data or otherwise sensitive? Then, these data 
can, very likely, not be published. 
-  Is there another rightsholder involved? Make sure to check the agreement (see  
Data rightsholder(s) and access). 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
15 
 