Digitizing the Culicidae collection of 
1 
Naturalis Biodiversity Center, with a 
2 
special focus on the former Bonne-
3 
Wepster subcollection 
4 
5   
6  Pasquale Ciliberti1, Astrid Roquas1, Becky Desjardins1, Bibiche Berkholst1, Frank Loggen1, 
7  Menno Hooft1, Gideon Gijswijt1 and Dick de Graaff1 
8   
9  1  Naturalis Biodiversity Center, Darwinweg 2 2333 CC Leiden 
10  Corresponding author: e-mail:pasquale.ciliberti@naturalis.nl 
 
11 
Abstract
12   
13  Natural history collections contain a huge amount of information on diversity, distribution and 
14  ecology of species. Unfortunately, this valuable information is not always available to 
15  researchers due to historical and practical constraints. The project we describe aims 
16  especially to unlock data handwritten in notebooks owned by Culicidae researcher Johanna 
17  Bonne-Wepster. The handwritten notes refer to specimens labeled only with a number. The 
18  notebooks were scanned and entered in a Google-Spreadsheet. The specimens were 
19  provided with a unique identifier, labeled with the information contained in the notebooks and 
20  the data exported to GBIF. In addition, type specimens were photographed.  

21  Beside the collection owned by Johanna Bonne-Wepster, mosquitoes from the  former 
22  Rijksmuseum voor Natuurlijk Historie collection and the former Zoölogisch Museum 
23  Amsterdam Nederland collection were digitized. All specimens are now housed at Naturalis 
24  Biodiversity Center museum in Leiden. 
25  This paper describes the efforts made to mobilize the data and the problems we 
26  encountered.  
27   
28  Keywords: field books, scans, Google spreadsheet, mobilizing data, coordinates, Culicidae 
29   
Data description 
30 
31  We describe a dataset of 55706 records of mosquitoes, mainly collected and observed in the 
32  former Dutch colonies of Indonesia and Suriname. The dataset refers primarily to 
33  mosquitoes identified and owned by Johanna Bonne-Wepster. This collection is now 
34  maintained by Naturalis Biodiversity Center (NBC), in Leiden, The Netherlands. 
35  The Bonne-Wepster  mosquitoes were collected by staff of the Centraal Militair 
36  Geneeskundig Laboratorium (CMGL), by fellow mosquitoes taxonomists and by Bonne-
37  Wepster herself. In addition, many mosquitoes were collected by the South East Asian 
38  Mosquito Project (SEAMP), an international collaboration of the American and Dutch armies. 
39  The mosquitoes collected within the SEAMP project were maintained and curated at the 
40  Instituut voor Tropische Hygiëne (ITH) in Amsterdam, the Netherlands. The collecting dates 
41  range from the year 1917 until the year 1961. The Bonne-Wepster collection was transferred 
42  during the seventies to the Rijksmuseum voor Natuurlijk Historie in Leiden (RMNH). 
43  The information about the specimens, including locality data and identifications were stored 
44  in 8 field books, 5 from CMGL, and 3 from ITH. These field books used the same numerical 
45  order, so a given registration number could refer to two separate specimens. In the 
46  collection, the specimens were labeled only with a number. Due to the age of the field books 

47  we feared losing the information they contained. Therefore the field books were scanned, 
48  specimens were provided with labels and the data was entered in a database.   
49  Before we started our project, we found that some mosquitoes with a Bonne-Wepster 
50  number were already provided with a locality label and species label.  
51  Most of the CMGL mosquitoes are missing, therefore those specimens could only be 
52  digitized as observation records (40705). In addition 1216 mosquitoes of the former 
53  Zoölogisch Museum Amsterdam Nederland (ZMAN) collection and 2388 mosquitoes of the 
54  former RMNH collection were digitized as well. All specimens belong to the NBC collection 
55  (table 1). 
Former owner  Structure of  Number of  Historical notes 
collection  specimens 
Bonne-Wepster   Formed by former  52102 of which 40705  Since the 70’s of 
CMGL collection and  records are  last century part of 
former ITH collection  observation only for  the RMNH 
and her own sampled  the missing CMGL  collection and 
specimens.   specimens.  since 2011 part of 
  the NBC collection 
 
RMNH     2388  Since 2011 part of 
NBC collection 
ZMAN    1216  Since 2011 part of 
NBC collection 
56   
57  Table1.  Composition of the specimens digitized during this project. For abbreviations see 
58  text. 
59   
Context 
60 
61  Natural history collections are a rich source of data that can be used for scientific research, 
62  education and for the general public [1]. Traditionally specimens were collected for private use 
63  in “cabinets of curiosity” and subsequently adopted by musea where they became the focal 
64  point of taxonomic research [2].  

| Former owner   | Structure of          | Number of            | Historical notes     |
|                | collection            | specimens            |                      |
|:---------------|:----------------------|:---------------------|:---------------------|
| Bonne-Wepster  | Formed by former      | 52102 of which 40705 | Since the 70’s of    |
|                | CMGL collection and   | records are          | last century part of |
|                | former ITH collection | observation only for | the RMNH             |
|                | and her own sampled   | the missing CMGL     | collection and       |
|                | specimens.            | specimens.           | since 2011 part of   |
|                |                       |                      | the NBC collection   |
| RMNH           |                       | 2388                 | Since 2011 part of   |
|                |                       |                      | NBC collection       |
| ZMAN           |                       | 1216                 | Since 2011 part of   |
|                |                       |                      | NBC collection       |

65  In recent years the use of Natural history collections has embraced other fields of the biological 
66  sciences in addition to taxonomy. Despite sampling biases Natural History Collections can be 
67  used  to  model  current  and  past  distributions  [3],  build  molecular  libraries  [4],  to  analyze 
68  biodiversity for example for conservation purposes [5], to assess hybridization and speciation 
69  events [6] and to predict reemergence of diseases [7].   
70  The Natural History Collection of NBC contains about 42 million objects sampled over the past 
71  200 years [8]. A small part of this collection is formed by mosquitoes. Mosquitoes, family 
72  Culicidae, are among the most feared insects for their vector role in transmitting a wide array 
73  of pathogens, the most notorious being protozoans of the genus Plasmodium, the causative 
74  agents of malaria [9]. According to the World Health Organization 619.000 people died of 
75  malaria in 2021 [10].  
76  Most of the mosquito specimens now housed at NBC were owned and identified by Johanna 
77  Bonne-Wepster. The collection was used to study the morphological features that characterize 
78  mosquito species. The specimens were provided with labels having a handwritten number 
79  under it (fig.1). These  numbers were linked to information contained in 8 different field books 
80  (fig.2). The data was organized in columns indicating the species name, a description of the 
81  collecting place, the collector and sometimes short taxonomical notes (fig.3). The field books 
82  of Johanna Bonne-Wepster are very old and we feared losing the data and consequently 
83  losing the value of the specimens. 
84  In fact as beautifully stated by Lane [11], a specimen separated from a label has no  scientific 
85  value: 
86   
87  “Together, a preserved organism and its label are a scientific specimen that has great intrinsic value. 
88  Separately, the label is a piece of paper with meaningless inscriptions upon it, and the plant, spider, 
89  microbe, mushroom, or bird, though carefully preserved, is just so much dead organic matter.”  
90  (Lane, 1996: 536) 
91   

92  Hence we strongly felt the need to “rescue” the information in the field books and to link this 
93  information to the specimens. 
Johanna Bonne-Wepster 
94 
95  Johanna Wepster was born in 1892 in The Hague. She was trained as a teacher. She 
96  married Cornelis Bonne, who was two years older and  trained as a physician, specializing 
97  as a parasitologist and with an interest in tropical medicine. Together they went to the Dutch 
98  overseas colonies. 
99  Bonne worked in Surinam first, and in 1927, they headed for the Dutch East Indies. He 
100  studied mosquitoes, and especially their role in spreading pathogens.  
101  Mrs. Bonne-Wepster started collecting mosquitoes at a large scale, and learned to identify 
102  many several species of Culicidae. In both Surinam and the Dutch East Indies, she did 
103  thorough investigations about this family of blood sucking insects. Her main goal was to give 
104  non-taxonomists the means to recognize vector species. 
105  Mrs. Bonne-Wepster  wrote and co-wrote several publications on the taxonomy of Culicidae 
106  [12,13,14,15,16,17]. During the twenties and thirties she collected thousands and thousands 
107  of specimens. Many adults, but also the eggs and larvae she kept and identified.  
108  In addition the couple worked as contributors for the The South East Asian Mosquito Project 
109  (SEAMP), an international collaboration between American and Dutch militaries. It was an 
110  important research project that lasted until after the Second World War. After their return to 
111  The Netherlands in 1948, Cornelis Bonne died. Johanna continued researching Culicidae 
112  primarily at the University of Amsterdam. Even though she was not academically trained, her 
113  enormous contribution to the field of Culicidae taxonomy did not go unnoticed. She received, 
114  an honorary doctorate from the University of Amsterdam in 1951.  
115  In the seventies her collection was transferred to RMNH in Leiden (table 1). Initially the 
116  museum obtained only the sampled specimens, not the field books with elaborate fieldnotes. 

117  The field books appeared to be lost until a curator of the RMNH made a visit to the elder 
118  Mrs. Bonne-Wepster and managed to retrieve them. 
119  Mrs. Bonne-Wepster passed away in 1978. 
120   
MATERIAL AND METHODS 
121 
122  Purpose: The main purpose of the project was to mobilize data contained in the field books 
123  of  Bonne-Wepster and corroborate it with the associated specimens. As we proceeded with 
124  the project, mosquitoes of the former ZMAN collection and the RMNH collection were 
125  digitized as well. 
126   
127  Sampling description: All specimens were carefully checked, investigated and provided 
128  with unique registration numbers (fig.4). This project produced a total of 55706 records. 
129  52102 records refer to the former Bonne-Wepster collection of which 40705 are the missing 
130  CMGL specimens which were digitized as observation records. 2388 records refer to 
131  mosquitoes of the RMNH Culicidae collection, 1216 records refer to specimens of the former 
132  ZMAN Culicidae collection (table 1). 
133   
134  Step description:  
135   
136  1)  First step was to enter the data of the field books in a Google Spreadsheet. 
137  2)  After the data was entered in the spreadsheet the field books were scanned and 
138  stored according to the Naturalis Archive protocol. 
139  3)  The entered records were georeferenced using the Point Radius method as 
140  described by Wieczorek et al. [18] (see Coordinates). 
141  4)  Unique registration numbers with a corresponding QR-code were added to the 
142  specimens. When the specimens were only labeled with a Bonne-Wepster number, 

143  additional labels were printed out and added. Those labels were a) a locality label, b) 
144  a species name label and c) an “ex. coll. Bonne-Wepster” label (fig.4). 
145  5)  The collection contained about 50 (holo)types, which were photographed (fig.5) using 
146  a Zeiss Discovery.V 12 modular stereo microscope equipped with an AxioCam Mrc 5 
147  camera. Depending on the state of the specimen photographs were taken of the 
148  habitus (dorsal and lateral views). A scale bar in micrometers was added to the 
149  photo. The labels accompanying the (holo)types were photographed using a Nikon 
150  camera D600 equipped with an AF Micro-Nikkor 60mm f/2.8D lens. An overhead 
151  camera setup was used so the labels could be photographed from above. 
152  6)  The Google spreadsheet was converted into a standardized sheet-format, applicable 
153  for the import into the NBC database. In the following table we present an overview 
154  of the specimen specific information included in this sheet. 
Number Type  Indicates the origin of a certain number. This translates to 'old 
registration number' for all records. 
Number Value  Value of the Bonne-Wepster field number, RMNH collection and ZMAN 
collection 
Register  Differentiates between the 8 different field books, for the ITH as well as 
the CMGL collections . 
RMNH-reg.nr. 
Unique registration number, added during this project. 
BE.-nr.  Registration number of the current storage unit, added during this 
project. 
Present_in_coll.  Presence of the specimen. 'Yes' if present. No/Missing if specimen was 
not found. 
General Remarks  1) Verbatim information from the field books not suited for registration 
in other fields. 2) Comments from collaborators handling the specimen, 
such as 'Genitals present on pin'. 

| Number Type      | Indicates the origin of a certain number. This translates to 'old          |
|                  | registration number' for all records.                                      |
|:-----------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Number Value     | Value of the Bonne-Wepster field number, RMNH collection and ZMAN          |
|                  | collection                                                                 |
| Register         | Differentiates between the 8 different field books, for the ITH as well as |
|                  | the CMGL collections .                                                     |
| RMNH-reg.nr.     | Unique registration number, added during this project.                     |
| BE.-nr.          | Registration number of the current storage unit, added during this         |
|                  | project.                                                                   |
| Present_in_coll. | Presence of the specimen. 'Yes' if present. No/Missing if specimen was     |
|                  | not found.                                                                 |
| General Remarks  | 1) Verbatim information from the field books not suited for registration   |
|                  | in other fields. 2) Comments from collaborators handling the specimen,     |
|                  | such as 'Genitals present on pin'.                                         |

Collector 
Collector of the specimen, verbatim. 
Datum tekstueel 
Collection Date, verbatim. 
Coll. Date Start 
Collection Date, template dd/mm/yyyy. 
Coll. Date End  Collection end date, if collection date covers a range of dates, template 
dd/mm/yyyy. 
Historical Owner  Indicates if the specimen was part of a significant historical collection 
(e.g. J. Bonne-Wepster). 
Sex 
Sexe of the specimen, if known: male/female. 
Phase or Stage 
Phase or stage of the specimen, primarily adult/larva. 
Country  Geographic information on the gathering site of the specimen. If 
necessary, historic 'Country', 'State/Province', 'Island' and other 
StateProvince 
location names are converted into current names. 
Island 
Locality 
Full Locality Tekst  All geographic information on the gathering site of the specimen, 
verbatim. 
Altitude 
Altitude in meters. 
Order  Taxonomic identification of the specimen. 
Family 
Genus 
Species 
Variety rank 
Variety 
Author 

| Collector           | Collector of the specimen, verbatim.                                      |
|:--------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Datum tekstueel     | Collection Date, verbatim.                                                |
| Coll. Date Start    | Collection Date, template dd/mm/yyyy.                                     |
| Coll. Date End      | Collection end date, if collection date covers a range of dates, template |
|                     | dd/mm/yyyy.                                                               |
| Historical Owner    | Indicates if the specimen was part of a significant historical collection |
|                     | (e.g. J. Bonne-Wepster).                                                  |
| Sex                 | Sexe of the specimen, if known: male/female.                              |
| Phase or Stage      | Phase or stage of the specimen, primarily adult/larva.                    |
| Country             | Geographic information on the gathering site of the specimen. If          |
|                     | necessary, historic 'Country', 'State/Province', 'Island' and other       |
|                     | location names are converted into current names.                          |
| StateProvince       |                                                                           |
| Island              |                                                                           |
| Locality            |                                                                           |
| Full Locality Tekst | All geographic information on the gathering site of the specimen,         |
|                     | verbatim.                                                                 |
| Altitude            | Altitude in meters.                                                       |
| Order               | Taxonomic identification of the specimen.                                 |
| Family              |                                                                           |
| Genus               |                                                                           |
| Species             |                                                                           |
| Variety rank        |                                                                           |
| Variety             |                                                                           |
| Author              |                                                                           |

Certainty  Certainty of the identification of the specimen. 'Uncertain' if the 
identification was doubtful. 
Name comments  Additional comments regarding the identification of the specimen, such 
as specific information on which the specimen was identified. Also, 
discrepancies between identification in the field books and on the pin 
were registered in this field. 
TYPEstatus 
If applicable, type-information of the specimen, verbatim. 
Determinator 
Name of the identifier of the specimen, verbatim. 
Det. Date 
Date of the determination template dd/mm/yyyy. 
Latitude  Georeference information: Coördinates 
Longitude 
Uncertainity  Margin of error of coordinates (in meters) 
Method  Point radius method (see Coordinates) 
Remarks_coordinates  Additional comments regarding georeference information. E.g. remarks 
when a locality was not found, or the margin of error proved too high 
(>100km). 
155  Table 2. Fields of the Google datasheet and their description 
156  Coordinates: For the indication of the coordinates we have used Google Earth and the 
157  Georeferencing calculator [19]. The used technique was the ‘point radius method’. The point 
158  radius method delineates a locality as a pair of points and a distance, with the distance being 
159  a radius that describes a circle around the points [18]. 
160  The  field  data  of  the  Bonne-Wepster  collection  did  not  contain  any  coordinates. 
161  Georeferencing an ‘old’ collection has some issues. The locality descriptions are not always 
162  very specific. When the locality name was not specific enough (for instance The Lawa River, 
163  Suriname) or when unknown locality names were used we did not assign any coordinates. 
164  The maximum length of the radius was set at 100 km.  

| Certainty           | Certainty of the identification of the specimen. 'Uncertain' if the    |
|:--------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------|
|                     | identification was doubtful.                                           |
| Name comments       | Additional comments regarding the identification of the specimen, such |
|                     | as specific information on which the specimen was identified. Also,    |
|                     | discrepancies between identification in the field books and on the pin |
|                     | were registered in this field.                                         |
| TYPEstatus          | If applicable, type-information of the specimen, verbatim.             |
| Determinator        | Name of the identifier of the specimen, verbatim.                      |
| Det. Date           | Date of the determination template dd/mm/yyyy.                         |
| Latitude            | Georeference information: Coördinates                                  |
| Longitude           |                                                                        |
| Uncertainity        | Margin of error of coordinates (in meters)                             |
| Method              | Point radius method (see Coordinates)                                  |
| Remarks_coordinates | Additional comments regarding georeference information. E.g. remarks   |
|                     | when a locality was not found, or the margin of error proved too high  |
|                     | (>100km).                                                              |

165  Because the gathering area of this collection is so widespread, from Sydney, Australia to 
166  Whitehorse, Canada and from Transvaal, South Africa to Pampanga, Philippines an indication 
167  of the minimum and maximum latitude and longitude is considered pointless. 
168   
169  Data validation: The field books were handwritten, so the interpretation of the locality 
170  names and species names was not always easy.  
171  Some of the mosquitoes with a Bonne-Wepster number were already provided with a locality 
172  and identification label. We always checked if the locality on the label coincided with that in 
173  the field book. When we found a mismatch between the two we reported that in the section 
174  General Remarks of the Google spreadsheet. The same was done when a mismatch 
175  concerned a species name, however this mismatch was annotated in the Name comment 
176  section of the Google Spreadsheet. 
177  To preserve the historical character of the collection as much as possible we decided not to 
178  synonymize the species names. Therefore the dataset is provided with the names as 
179  originally given by Bonne-Wepster. However, spelling mistakes were corrected using the 
180  taxonomic checklist Culicipedia [20]. The same checklist was used to interpret genus and 
181  species names which were abbreviated in the field books. This was done to ensure that the 
182  names imported in the NBC Database and ultimately exported to the GBIF platform were 
183  free of errors. 
184  We never removed any of the labels under a specimen, and it was difficult to establish how 
185  discrepancies came about. It could be that a mosquito expert later redetermined some 
186  specimens or that there were some mistakes made during the previous labeling process, but 
187  that is merely speculation.  
188  Sometimes the same number could refer to two specimens e.g. no.234, one from the former 
189  CMGL collection or one from the former ITH collection. This could be a problem in 
190  establishing the collecting event. By working intensively with the specimens we noticed a 

191  difference in the way the two subcollections were labeled. The ITH collection had numbers 
192  written vertically (fig.6) while the CMGL collection had numbers written horizontally (fig.6). 
Geographic coverage 
193 
194  Description 
195   
196  Indonesia, India, Iran, Sri Lanka, Yemen, Philippines, China, Thailand 
197  Suriname, Brazil, Panama, Guatemala, Peru, Costa Rica, Cuba, Jamaica, Nicaragua, 
198  Bahamas, Trinidad & Tobago, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Ecuador, Guadalupe, Virgin 
199  Islands, France, Belize, Puerto Rico, Colombia, Canada, Mexico, U.S.A., Netherlands, 
200  Belgium, Russia, Croatia, Spain, North Macedonia, Bulgaria, Romania 
201  Israel, Palestine, Italy, France, Portugal, Australia, Papua New Guinea, Congo, South Africa, 
202  The Gambia, Republic of Guinea, Mozambique 
203   
204  The vast majority of the specimens were collected in Indonesia. Surinam ranks second in 
205  numbers  collected.   
206   
207   
208   
209   
210   
211   
 
212 
 
213 
 
214 

Taxonomic coverage 
215 
216  Taxa included: 
217   
Rank  Scientific Name  Common Name 
Kingdom  Animalia  Animals 
Phylum  Arthropoda  Arthropods 
Class  Insecta  Insects 
Order  Diptera  Two-winged insects 
Family  Culicidae  Mosquitoes 
genus  Aedes, Aedimorphus,   
Anopheles, Armigeres, 
Banksinella, Bironella, 
Cancraedes, Chaoborus, 
Chironomus, Coquilletia, 
Coquilletidia, Corethra, 
Corethrella, Culex, 
Culiciomyia, Culiseta, 
Deinocerites, Dendromyia, 
Desvoidya, Ficalbia, Finlaya, 
Goeldia, Haemagogus, 
Harpagomyia, Heizmannia, 
Hodgesia, Howardina, 
Joblotia, Larrainea, 

| Rank    | Scientific Name               | Common Name        |
|:--------|:------------------------------|:-------------------|
| Kingdom | Animalia                      | Animals            |
| Phylum  | Arthropoda                    | Arthropods         |
| Class   | Insecta                       | Insects            |
| Order   | Diptera                       | Two-winged insects |
| Family  | Culicidae                     | Mosquitoes         |
| genus   | Aedes, Aedimorphus,           |                    |
|         | Anopheles, Armigeres,         |                    |
|         | Banksinella, Bironella,       |                    |
|         | Cancraedes, Chaoborus,        |                    |
|         | Chironomus, Coquilletia,      |                    |
|         | Coquilletidia, Corethra,      |                    |
|         | Corethrella, Culex,           |                    |
|         | Culiciomyia, Culiseta,        |                    |
|         | Deinocerites, Dendromyia,     |                    |
|         | Desvoidya, Ficalbia, Finlaya, |                    |
|         | Goeldia, Haemagogus,          |                    |
|         | Harpagomyia, Heizmannia,      |                    |
|         | Hodgesia, Howardina,          |                    |
|         | Joblotia, Larrainea,          |                    |

Leicesteria, Leucomyia, 
Lophoceratomyia,  Limatus, 
Lutzia, Machlonyx, Malaya, 
Mansonia, Mansoniodes, 
Megarhinus, Miamyia, 
Mimomyia, Mochthogenes, 
Mucidus, Myzomyia, 
Ochlerotatus, 
Orthopodomyia, Pardomyia, 
Pseudoskusea, Psorophora, 
Rachionotomya, 
Rachiosura, Runchomyia, 
Sabethes,  
Sabethoides, Simulium, 
Skusea 
Stegomyia,  
Taeniorhynchus,  
Theobaldia, Tipulida, 
Topomyia, Toxorhynchites, 
Trichoprosopon, 
Tripteroides, Uranotaenia, 
Verralina, Wyeomyia 
218   
 
219 
 
220 
 
221 

| 0   | 1                          | 2   |
|:----|:---------------------------|:----|
|     | Leicesteria, Leucomyia,    |     |
|     | Lophoceratomyia, Limatus,  |     |
|     | Lutzia, Machlonyx, Malaya, |     |
|     | Mansonia, Mansoniodes,     |     |
|     | Megarhinus, Miamyia,       |     |
|     | Mimomyia, Mochthogenes,    |     |
|     | Mucidus, Myzomyia,         |     |
|     | Ochlerotatus,              |     |
|     | Orthopodomyia, Pardomyia,  |     |
|     | Pseudoskusea, Psorophora,  |     |
|     | Rachionotomya,             |     |
|     | Rachiosura, Runchomyia,    |     |
|     | Sabethes,                  |     |
|     | Sabethoides, Simulium,     |     |
|     | Skusea                     |     |
|     | Stegomyia,                 |     |
|     | Taeniorhynchus,            |     |
|     | Theobaldia, Tipulida,      |     |
|     | Topomyia, Toxorhynchites,  |     |
|     | Trichoprosopon,            |     |
|     | Tripteroides, Uranotaenia, |     |
|     | Verralina, Wyeomyia        |     |

Re-Use Potential 
222 
223  The data made available through this project is valuable because it describes historical and 
224  recent records of mosquitoes and can be used in different areas of research including 
225  estimates of spatial distribution, modeling current and future distributions through the tool of 
226  Ecological Niche Modeling, systematics and for vector control programs. 
227  The species names attached to the records are the original one and were not synonymized. 
228   
DATA AVAILABILITY 
229 
230  The dataset is available in the GBIF repository [21]. 
231   
ETHICAL APPROVAL 
232 
233  Not Applicable 
234   
CONSENT FOR PUBLICATION 
235 
236  Not Applicable 
237   
COMPETING INTERESTS 
238 
239  The author(s) declare they have no competing interests 
Funding 
240 
241  This work was co-funded by NLBIF, nlbif2020.007 

Author contributions 
242 
243  Pasquale Ciliberti, assigned coordinates, digitized specimens, took pictures of the types, 
244  quality control of the spreadsheet, wrote the paper, applied for funding 
245  Astrid Roquas, entered the field books data in the spreadsheet, digitized specimens, wrote 
246  the paper 
247  Becky Desjardins, wrote the paper 
248  Bibiche Berkholst, digitized specimens, took pictures of the types, quality control of the 
249  spreadsheet, wrote the paper 
250  Frank Loggen, assigned coordinates, digitized specimens, curated and prepared the 
251  spreadsheet, quality control of the spreadsheet, wrote the paper 
252  Menno Hooft, scanned the field books 
253  Gideon Gijswijt, curated and imported the spreadsheet into the NBC database 
254  Dick de Graaff, assigned coordinates, digitized specimens, quality control of the 
255  spreadsheet, wrote the paper, applied for funding 
Acknowledgements 
256 
257  We are very thankful to NLBIF for funding the project. Many thanks to Caroline Pepermans 
258  for helping coordinate the team at the beginning of the project and to Jeroen Creuwels for 
259  his suggestions in how to assign coordinates and his precious help in generating the DOI. 
260  Thanks to Maarten Koster for his valuable help in entering the data in the Google 
261  spreadsheet on a voluntary basis at the very beginning of the project. We are grateful to 
262  Hendrik van Ede, Mark Doeland and Tamara de Reus for their help in assigning the 
263  coordinates. 
264   

References 
265 
266   
267  1  Bradley RD, Bradley LC, Garner HJ & Baker RJ. Assessing the value of Natural 
268  History Collections and addressing issues regarding long-term growth and care. 
269  BioScience, 2014; 64: 1150-1158 
270   
271  2  Hilton EJ, Watkins-Colwell GJ & Huber SK. The expanding role of Natural History 
272  Collections. Ichthyology & Herpetology, 2021; 109 (2): 379-391 
273   
274  3  Ewers-Saucedo C, Allspach A, Barilaro C, Bick A, Brandt A, Fiege D, Füting S, 
275  Hausdorf B, Hayer S, Husemann M, Joger U, Kamcke C, Küster M, Lohrmann V, 
276  Martin I, Michalik P,  Reinicke G,  Schwentner M, Stiller M & Brandis D. Natural 
277  History collections recapitulate 200 years of faunal change. Royal Society Open 
278  Science, 2021; 8:1-19 
279   
280  4  Yeates DK, Zwick A & Mikheyev AS. Museum are biobanks: unlocking the genetic 
281  potential of the three billion specimens in the world’s biological collections. Current 
282  opinion in Insect Science, 2016; 18: 83-88 
283   
284  5  Lister AM & Climate Change Research Group. Natural history collections as 
285  source of long-term datasets. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 2011; 26 (4): 153-154 
286   
287  6  Gaubert P, Papes M, Peterson AT. Natural history collections and the conservation 
288  of poorly known taxa: Ecological niche modeling in central African rainforest genets 
289  ( Genetta ssp.). Biological Conservation, 2006; 1 (130): 106-117 
290   

291  7  DiEuliis D, Johnson KR, Morse SS & Schindel DE. Specimens collections should 
292  have a much bigger role in infectious disease research and response. PNAS, 2016; 
293  113 (1): 4-7 
294   
295  8  Monquil-Broersen T & Gassó Miracle E,. Van onschatbare waarde 200 jaar 
296  Naturalis. Naturalis Biodiversity Center & Walburg Pers, Zutphen, 2020; pp. 1-352 
297   
298  9  Becker N, Petric D, Zgomba M, Boase C, Madon M, Dahl C, Kaiser A. Mosquito 
299  and their control. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 2010; 1-577 
300   
301  10  World Malaria Report 2022. Geneva: World Health Organization, 2022; 1-372 
302   
303  11  Lane MA. Roles of Natural history collections. Annals of the Missouri Botanical 
304  Garden, 1996; 83: 536-545 
305   
306  12  van den Assem J & Bonne-Wepster J.  New Guinea Culicidae: a synopsis of 
307  vectors, pests and common species. Zoologische Bijdragen, 1964; 6: 1-136 
308   
309  13  Bonne C & Bonne-Wepster J. Mosquitoes of Surinam: a study on Neotropical 
310  mosquitoes. Mededeeling Afdeeling Tropische Hygiëne,1925; 13: 1-558 
311   
312  14  Bonne-Wepster J & Brug SL . The subgenus Stegomyia in Netherlands India. 
313  Geneeskundig Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indië,1932; 72: 39-119. 
314  15  Bonne-Wepster J & Brug SL. Nederlandsch-Indische Culicinen. Geneeskundig 
315  Tijdschrift voor Nederlandsch Indië,1937; 77: 1-105 
316  16  Bonne-Wepster J & Swellengrebel NH. The anopheline mosquitoes of the Indo-
317  Australian Region, 1953; J.H. de Bussy, Amsterdam: 1-504. 

318  17  Bonne-Wepster J. Synopsis of a hundred common non-anopheline mosquitoes of 
319  the greater and lesser Sundas, the Moluccas and New Guinea. Special publication, 
320  Department of Tropical Hygiene & Geographical Pathology,1954; pp.1-147. 
321  18  Wieczorek J, Guo Q & Hijmans RJ. The point-radius method for georeferencing 
322  locality descriptions and calculating associated uncertainty. International Journal of 
323  Geographical Information Science, 2004; 18 (8): 745-767 
324   
325  19  Wieczorek C, Wieczorek J. Georeferencing Calculator, 2021 
326  http://georeferencing.org/georefcalculator/gc.html. Accessed [23-2-2023]. 
327   
328  20  Harbach RE. Culicipedia: Species-group, genus group and family group names in 
329  Culicidae (Diptera). CABI Publishing, 2018; pp 1-396 
330   
331  21  Global Biodiversity Information Facility. https://doi.org/10.15468/dl.crvd8z  
332   
333   
334   
335   
336   
337   
338   
339   
340   
341   
342   
343   
344   

345  FIGURES: 
346   
347   
348  Fig.1. Example of a specimen labeled only with a number. 
349   
350   

351   
352  Fig.2. Field book. 
353   
354   

355   
356  Fig.3. Example of the data contained in a field book 
357   
358   
359   
360   

361   
362  Fig.4. Examples of labels added during this project when only a number was pinned under 
363  the specimen. Note the unique registration number with a QR-code added to all specimens. 
364   
365   
366   

367   
368   
369  Fig.5. Above. Example of a type specimen (Culex brevispinosus Bonne-Wepster & Bonne 
370  1920) Under. Labels of the type specimen Culex brevispinosus 

371   
372   
373   
374  Fig.6.Above. Example of typical ITH label number  
375  Under: Example of typical CMGL label number 
376   
377   