Transformational Leadership and Job Satisfaction; An Analytic Investigation                 BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(1)” 
 
DOI Number of the Paper: https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.00000 
Link of the Paper: https://jar.bwo-researches.com/index.php/jarh/article/view/389 
Edition Link: Journal of Academic Research for Humanities JARH, 4(1) January-March 2024 
HJRS Link: Journal of Academic Research for Humanities JARH (HEC-Recognized for 2023-2024) 
 
 
TRANSFORMATIONAL LEADERSHIP AND JOB SATISFACTION; AN ANALYTIC INVESTIGATION 
 
Corresponding &  INAAMUL HAQ MUGHAL, MPhil Scholar University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir 
Author 1:  Muzaffarabad, Kashmir, Email: 
Co-Author 2:  DR. BATOOL ATTA, Assistant Professor Institute of Education University of Azad 
Jammu & Kashmir Muzaffarabad Kashmir, Email: 
Co-Author 3:  DR. ADEEL AHMED KHAN, Assistant Professor Institute of Education University of 
Azad Jammu & Kashmir Muzaffarabad Kashmir, Email: 
___________________________________________________________________________________ 
Paper Information        Abstract 
Citation of the paper:   QR Code for the  The  study  explored  the  relationship  between 
(JARH)  Mughal,  I.  H.,  Atta,  B.,  Paper:  transformational leadership of principals and the job 
and  Khan,  A.  A.,  (2024).  satisfaction  of  secondary  school  teachers  in 
Transformational  Leadership  and  Job 
Muzaffarabad.  The  study  was  limited  to  teachers 
Satisfaction; An Analytic Investigation. 
working in government male and female secondary 
In Journal of Academic Research 
schools  in  Muzaffarabad.  It  was  a  descriptive 
for Humanities, 4(1), 111–120.  
correlational study and the survey method was used 
  for data collection. A total sample of 254 secondary 
Subject Areas for JARH:  school teachers and 90 principals were selected using 
1 Education 
a  convenient  sampling  technique.  The  Multifactor 
2 Social Sciences  
Leadership  Questionnaire  (MLQ)  and  the  Job 
Timeline of the Paper at JARH: 
Satisfaction Survey (JSS) were the two tools used to 
Received on: 30-01-2024 
gather the data. Data was collected through personal 
Reviews Completed on: 17-03-2024 
visits to the schools. Data was analyzed by applying 
Accepted on: 25-03-2024 
Pearson's correlation. The study found a significant 
Online on: 27-03-2024 
License:  positive  relationship  between  transformational 
leadership  and  the  job  satisfaction  of  secondary 
 
school  teachers.  This  study  indicates  that  effective 
Creative  Commons  Attribution-Share  Alike  4.0 
transformational leadership can contribute to higher 
International License 
job  satisfaction  among  teachers.  Future  research 
Recognized for BWO-R:  could  explore  additional  factors  influencing  this 
relationship. 
Keywords:  transformational  leadership,  job 
 
satisfaction,  secondary  school  teachers, 
Published by  : 
BWO Researches INTL.
Muzaffarabad, correlational study. 
   
DOI Image of the paper: 
   
 
111
 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| Corresponding &   | INAAMUL HAQ MUGHAL, MPhil Scholar University of Azad Jammu & Kashmir           |
| Author 1:         | Muzaffarabad, Kashmir, Email:                                                  |
|:------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Co-Author 2:      | DR. BATOOL ATTA, Assistant Professor Institute of Education University of Azad |
|                   | Jammu & Kashmir Muzaffarabad Kashmir, Email:                                   |
| Co-Author 3:      | DR. ADEEL AHMED KHAN, Assistant Professor Institute of Education University of |
|                   | Azad Jammu & Kashmir Muzaffarabad Kashmir, Email:                              |

Transformational Leadership and Job Satisfaction; An Analytic Investigation    BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(1)” 
Introduction  accomplishment; the level of the teacher's job 
In  modern  organizational  perspectives,  satisfaction can ensure a significant impact on 
considering the intricate relationship between  both the teacher's lifecycle and particularly on 
transformational  leadership  styles  and  the student’s achievements (Chamundeswari, 
employee job satisfaction is fundamental for  2013).  Meeting  students'  educational, 
the development of conducive work situations  psychological,  and  expressive  requirements 
and successful organizational accomplishment  are  directly  related  to  their  level  of  job 
(Akdere, & Tarcan, 2015). Among the several  satisfaction (Lors, 2020). 
leadership  approaches,  transformational  Consequently, for individual employees to 
leadership  has  garnered  significant  accomplish their jobs as effectively as possible, 
consideration  for  its  potential  to  positively  management  leaders  must  understand  what 
affect  employee  attitudes  and  behaviours.  motivates  and  activates  employees. 
Regarded  for  its  prominence  on  inspiration,  Motivation is linked to performance and job 
intellectual  stimulation,  individualized  satisfaction (Dıab, 2022). 
consideration,  and  idealized  influence,  In all management disciplines, leadership is 
transformational leadership has the potential  a  basic  procedure  that  involves  several 
to enlighten motivated and involved workers  responsibilities  that  might  assist  an 
(Pawar, 2016). Job satisfaction, attending as a  organization in achieving its objectives. To this 
key  display  of  employee  well-being  and  end, experts in leadership and academics offer 
organizational  efficiency,  and  attitudes  as  a  associations  practical  recommendations  for 
focal  point  for  exploring  the  influence  of  improving  organizational  performance 
transformational leadership (Jena, Pradhan, &  (Triraharjo et al., 2020). 
Panigrahy,  2018).  Through  an  inclusive  Statement of the Problem  
investigation  of  existing  literature  and  The  problem  under  consideration  is  the 
empirical  data,  this  study  determined  that  potential  influence  of  transformational 
transformational  leadership  influences  job  leadership, established by school principals, on 
satisfaction, providing valuable inferences for  the  job  satisfaction  of  secondary  school 
administrative leaders and investigators.  teachers in Muzaffarabad. Job satisfaction is 
The  teachers  would  get  attracted  to  central to employee well-being and efficiency, 
teaching their students successfully when they  predominantly in the education sector, where 
are satisfied with their jobs (Heller, 2004). Like  it affects teacher retention and inclusive job 
Pakistan,  they  are  trying  to  improve  their  performance (Madigan, & Kim, 2021). High in-
quality  of  education,  so  that  it  meets  the  coming  duties  and  informed  dissatisfaction 
demand  of  globalization.  Teachers  would  among  secondary  school  teachers'  attitude 
perform to maximum capacity, only if they are  challenges  to  educational  excellence. 
satisfied with their jobs. So, job satisfaction is  Although  transformational  leadership  is 
an  important  phenomenon  in  every  sector  recognized as effective, its specific effect on 
particularly  in  the  teaching  profession  teacher  job  satisfaction  in  Muzaffarabad 
(Swedana, 2023).  remains  uncertain.  Considerate  this 
Job  satisfaction  among  teachers  is  a  relationship  is  dynamic  for  apprising 
significant issue since it has an impact on how  leadership  practices  and  policies  to  develop 
each performs in his or her position, which has  teacher  satisfaction  and  student  learning 
an  impact  on  the  effectiveness  of  their  experiences. Existing investigation has focused 
instruction  and  the  operation  of  the  school  on  leadership  styles  generally,  but  there's  a 
(Caprara et al., 2003). Teacher job satisfaction  lack  of  consideration  for  transformational 
is strongly correlated with students' academic  leadership's influence on teacher satisfaction 
112 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Transformational Leadership and Job Satisfaction; An Analytic Investigation    BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(1)” 
in  Muzaffarabad,  requiring  a  dedicated  principals correlates with higher levels of job 
exploration.  This  study  aims  to  assist  school  satisfaction among secondary school teachers. 
principals,  policymakers,  researchers,  and  Hypotheses of the Study 
educators in the search to develop leadership  The  study  employed  the  following 
practices  and  teacher  satisfaction  in  hypothesis: 
Muzaffarabad's secondary schools.  H : Transformational leadership has a positive 
1
Significance of the Research  relationship with job satisfaction. 
The  significance  of  the  research  on  Literature Review 
transformational  leadership  and  job  Transformational  leadership  and  job 
satisfaction  is  to  notify  leadership  practices  satisfaction are two fundamental factors that 
and  policies  in  educational  situations.  By  significantly  impact  organizational  efficiency 
exploring  the  relationship  between  and employee well-being (Nielsen et al., 2009). 
transformational  leadership  and  job  Bass  &  Riggio  (2006)  state  transformational 
satisfaction among secondary school teachers,  leadership  as  an  activity  where  individuals 
this  study  can  provide  an  appreciated  forge  relationships  that  increase  both 
understanding  for  school  administrators,  followers' and leaders' levels of work-related 
policymakers, and instructors. Accepting how  interest.  Syed,  Channa,  &  Khoso  (2020) 
transformational  leadership  encourages  job  examine the strong connection between job 
satisfaction can be central to the development  satisfaction  and  employees'  willingness  to 
of  additional  effective  leadership  training  work,  accentuating  its  significant  effect  on 
programs and approaches for school principals.  motivation. 
Additionally,  by  successful  job  satisfaction  Many  studies  have  explored  the 
among  teachers,  schools  can  increase  relationship  between  transformational 
employee  retention  rates,  eventually  leadership  and  job  satisfaction  among 
prominent  to  better  educational  secondary  school  teachers  such  as  Dewi, 
consequences  for  learners.  This  exploration  Yulianto,  and  Ruswanti  (2022)  explore  the 
also  contributes  to  the  existing  body  of  significant  positive  correlation  between 
knowledge  on  leadership  styles  and  their  transformational  leadership  shown  by  head 
influence  on  employee  well-being,  mostly  teachers  and  teachers'  job  satisfaction, 
from the perspective of secondary education  signifying the potential of effective leadership 
in Muzaffarabad. Generally, the results of this  in enhancing teacher satisfaction. Consistently, 
study have the prospect of positively affecting  Firmansyah  et  al.,  (2022)  highlighted  the 
the  work  situation  and  overall  efficiency  of  significant  effect  of  transformational 
secondary  schools  in  Muzaffarabad  and  leadership on teachers' job satisfaction within 
elsewhere.  the classroom. 
Objective of the Study  Moreover, an investigation by Rao, (2023) 
The objective is to assess the correlation  highlights the influence of administrators' role 
between  transformational  leadership  showing on teachers' self-efficacy, specifying 
exhibited by principals and the job satisfaction  the  significance  of  leadership  behaviour  in 
levels  of  secondary  school  teachers  in  influencing  teacher  attitudes.  Chaudhuri,  & 
Muzaffarabad.  The  study  aims  to  determine  Ghosh, (2012) concentrated on the critical role 
whether  there  is  a  significant  positive  of  social  assignation  in  encouraging  positive 
relationship  between  these  variables.  change  concluding  transformational 
Precisely,  it  searches  to  determine  whether  leadership within organizations. 
effective  transformational  leadership  among  In addition, Dalton, (2023) determines how 
truthful  and  faithful  followers  contribute  to 
113 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Transformational Leadership and Job Satisfaction; An Analytic Investigation    BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(1)” 
the  effectiveness  of  transformational  Conceptual Framework 
leadership, prominent to improved motivation  Explanation of the Components: 
and possession of organizational goals. Givens  1.  Transformational  Leadership:  This  is  the 
(2008)  accentuated  the  positive  correlation  independent  variable  in  the  study.  It 
between inspiration and enthusiasm to work  represents the leadership style of school 
with  followers'  views  of  their  superiors,  teachers that involves inspiring, motivating, 
emphasizing  the  motivational  effect  of  and empowering teachers to achieve their 
transformational leadership.  best. 
As  well,  the  literature  recommends  a  2.  Job  Satisfaction  of  Secondary  School 
mutual  relationship  between  leaders'  Teachers: This is the dependent variable in 
commitment and followers' satisfaction (Huo  the  study.  It  represents  the  level  of 
et al., 2020). Metwally, El-Bishbishy, & Nawar,  contentment,  fulfilment,  and  positive 
(2014) establish a direct correlation between  feelings experienced by secondary school 
transformational  leadership  and  employee  teachers in Muzaffarabad regarding their 
satisfaction,  representing  the  role  of  jobs. 
transformative  leaders  in  addressing  3.  Relationship Exploration: This component 
employees'  anxieties.  Likewise,  studies  have  signifies the main focus of the study, which 
accentuated the vital role of transformational  is  to  explore  the  relationship  between 
leadership in motivating teacher effectiveness  transformational  leadership  and  job 
and curriculum implementation (Sirait, 2021).  satisfaction  among  secondary  school 
Shatila,  Agyei,  &  Aloulou,  (2023)  emphasize  teachers. 
the  direct  link  between  performance  and  4.  Contextual  Factors:  These  are  external 
transformational  leadership,  highlighting  the  factors  that  could  influence  the 
motivational  influence  of  transformative  relationship  between  transformational 
leaders.  leadership and job satisfaction. Contextual 
Transformational  leadership  and  job  factors  might  include  cultural  norms, 
satisfaction  are  two  important  factors  that  organizational climate, school policies, and 
influence  organizational  effectiveness  and  regional  socio-economic  conditions.  This 
employee  well-being.  Stewart,  (2012)  conceptual  framework  visualizes  the 
expresses  transformational  leadership  as  an  central components of the study and the 
action  where  individuals  falsify  relationships  relationships among them. 
that boost both followers' and leaders' levels 
Transformational 
of work-related eagerness. Zahari et al., (2020) 
Leadership of 
Teachers 
explored the strong association between job 
satisfaction  and  employees'  inclination  to 
Job Satisfaction 
effort, emphasizing its generous influence on  of    Secondary 
School Teachers 
inspiration. 
Although  the  wealth  of  exploration 
Reationship 
Exploration
associates  the  positive  relationship  between 
transformational  leadership  and  job 
satisfaction,  there  is  a  necessity  for  more 
Contextual 
Factors
investigation,  particularly  in  non-Western 
 
circumstances  like  Muzaffarabad.  More 
Visual Representation Fig 1 
controlled studies are needed to recognize the 
 
dynamics of this relationship completely and 
 
its implications for educational consequences. 
 
114 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| None                                             | Transformational leadership and job   |
|:-------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------|
| satisfaction are two important factors that      |                                       |
| influence organizational effectiveness and       |                                       |
| employee well-being. Stewart, (2012)             |                                       |
| expresses transformational leadership as an      |                                       |
| action where individuals falsify relationships   |                                       |
| that boost both followers' and leaders' levels   |                                       |
| of work-related eagerness. Zahari et al., (2020) |                                       |
| explored the strong association between job      |                                       |
| satisfaction and employees' inclination to       |                                       |
| effort, emphasizing its generous influence on    |                                       |
| inspiration.                                     |                                       |

| None                                           | Although the wealth of exploration   |
|:-----------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------|
| associates the positive relationship between   |                                      |
| transformational leadership and job            |                                      |
| satisfaction, there is a necessity for more    |                                      |
| investigation, particularly in non-Western     |                                      |
| circumstances like Muzaffarabad. More          |                                      |
| controlled studies are needed to recognize the |                                      |
| dynamics of this relationship completely and   |                                      |
| its implications for educational consequences. |                                      |

Transformational Leadership and Job Satisfaction; An Analytic Investigation    BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(1)” 
Research Methodology  Results and Discussion 
The  quantitative  research  methodology  Pearson  Correlation,  Relationship  between 
was employed to investigate the relationship  Transformational Leadership of Principals and Job 
Satisfaction of the Secondary School Teachers 
between  transformational  leadership  on  the 
H2:  Transformational  leadership  has  a 
job satisfaction of secondary school teachers 
positive relationship with job satisfaction. 
in  Muzaffarabad.  To  achieve  the  research 
Correlations 
objectives, a quantitative research design was 
  Job  Transformatio
adopted, utilizing a survey questionnaire. This 
Satisfacti nal Leadership 
approach enabled the collection of data from 
on 
a  considerable  sample  of  secondary  school 
Pearson  1  216 
teachers,  facilitating  the  exploration  of  the 
Correlation 
relationship  between  transformational 
Job 
  .001 
Sig. (2-tailed) 
leadership  and  job  satisfaction.  The  target 
Satisfaction 
group was comprised of both male and female  254  254 
N 
secondary  school  teachers  and  principals  in 
Pearson  216  1 
Muzaffarabad.  A  convenient  sampling 
Correlation 
Transforma
technique was employed total sample size of 
.001   
tional  Sig. (2-tailed) 
254  teachers  and  90  principals,  ensuring 
Leadership 
254  254 
appropriate  representation  and  minimizing  N 
sampling errors. 
 
The  research  instruments  comprise  the 
The table presents the Pearson correlation 
Multifactor  Leadership  Questionnaire  (MLQ) 
between  the  transformational  leadership  of 
adopted and the Job Satisfaction Survey (JSS), 
principals and the job satisfaction of secondary 
developed  by  Spector  (1994)  used  originally 
school  teachers.  The  Pearson  correlation 
after  getting  permission.  These  standardized 
coefficient  measures  the  strength  and 
tools  have  been  widely  recognized  and 
direction  of  the  linear  relationship  between 
validated  for  assessing  transformational 
two  variables,  the  two  variables  being 
leadership  and  job  satisfaction,  respectively. 
examined  are  job  satisfaction  and 
The  MLQ  measures  leadership  styles, 
transformational  leadership.  This  indicates  a 
specifically  focusing  on  the  transformational 
positive correlation between the two variables. 
leadership dimension, while the JSS evaluates 
It suggests that there is a moderate positive 
job  satisfaction.  The  instruments  were 
relationship  between  the  level  of 
carefully  adapted  to  fit  the  regional  context 
transformational  leadership  exhibited  by 
translated  into  Urdu  and  validated  through 
principals and the job satisfaction of secondary 
expert consultation, ensuring their relevance 
school teachers. 
to  the  study.  Ethical  considerations  were 
The  significance  (Sig.)  value  of  0.001  is 
strictly  followed  throughout  the  data 
highly statistically significant. This means that 
collection process, with participants' informed 
the observed correlation is unlikely to occur by 
consent and confidentiality being maintained. 
chance  and  is  likely  a  true  relationship 
The  data  analysis  process  incorporated 
between  the  variables.  Therefore,  we  can 
inferential  statistics,  utilizing  software  like 
conclude  that  there  is  a  significant  positive 
SPSS version 21. Inferential statistics, such as 
correlation  between  transformational 
Pearson's  correlation  coefficient,  were 
leadership  and  job  satisfaction  among 
employed to make inferences about the larger 
secondary school teachers. 
population and explore relationships between 
Both variables have the same correlation 
variables.  
coefficient and significance value, indicating a 
115 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| Correlations   | None            | None       | None           |
|:---------------|:----------------|:-----------|:---------------|
|                |                 | Job        | Transformatio  |
|                |                 | Satisfacti | nal Leadership |
|                |                 | on         |                |
|                | Pearson         | 1          | 216            |
|                | Correlation     |            |                |
| Job            |                 |            | .001           |
|                | Sig. (2-tailed) |            |                |
| Satisfaction   |                 |            |                |
|                |                 |            |                |
|                |                 | 254        | 254            |
|                | N               |            |                |
|                |                 |            |                |
|                |                 |            |                |
|                | Pearson         | 216        | 1              |
|                | Correlation     |            |                |
| Transforma     |                 |            |                |
|                |                 | .001       |                |
| tional         | Sig. (2-tailed) |            |                |
|                |                 |            |                |
| Leadership     |                 |            |                |
|                |                 | 254        | 254            |
|                | N               |            |                |
|                |                 |            |                |
|                |                 |            |                |

Transformational Leadership and Job Satisfaction; An Analytic Investigation    BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(1)” 
symmetrical  relationship  between  their staff, it leads to increased job satisfaction 
transformational  leadership  and  job  among teachers. 
satisfaction. This means that higher levels of  Moreover,  the  significance  level  (Sig.)  of 
transformational  leadership  are  associated  0.001 indicates a highly statistically significant 
with  higher  levels  of  job  satisfaction  among  relationship  between  transformational 
secondary school teachers, and vice versa. The  leadership  and  job  satisfaction.  This  repeats 
sample size (N) of 254 participants provides a  the  findings  of  previous  studies,  such  as 
relatively  large  dataset,  which  increases  the  Stewart  (2006),  who  highlighted  the 
reliability and generalizability of the findings.  perspective of transformational leadership to 
We would accept the H  and conclude that  inspire and enable followers to exceed their 
1
Transformational  leadership  has  a  positive  prospects. Adillo, & Netshitangani, (2019) also 
relationship  with  job  satisfaction.  The  table  emphasized  the  crucial  role  of 
shows  that  there  is  a  significant  positive  transformational  principals  in  the 
correlation  between  the  transformational  development of a positive school environment, 
leadership  of  principals  and  the  job  where  teachers  feel  appreciated,  motivated, 
satisfaction of secondary school teachers. This  and engaged in their work. 
suggests  that  when  principals  exhibit  higher  Also,  the  symmetrical  relationship 
levels of transformational leadership, it tends  observed  between  transformational 
to result in increased job satisfaction among  leadership  and  job  satisfaction,  with  both 
teachers.  variables  involving  the  same  correlation 
The  results  are  consistent  with  previous  coefficient and significance value, emphasizes 
research  that  has  demonstrated  that  the  concept  that  higher  levels  of 
transformational  leadership  practices  transformational  leadership  are  associated 
positively affect employee attitudes and well- with  higher  levels  of  job  satisfaction  among 
being  (Cassar,  Bezzina,  &  Buttigieg,  2017).  teachers, and vice versa (Abdul et al., 2014). 
When  school  principals  exhibit  Mehari,  (2015)  suggested  that 
transformational  leadership  behaviours,  transformational  leaders  show  genuine 
teachers  are  more  likely  to  feel  valued,  anxiety  for  their  followers'  well-being  and 
motivated,  and  engaged,  leading  to  higher  professional progress, which in turn improves 
levels of job satisfaction.  job  satisfaction.  The  correlation  analysis 
The results obtained from the analysis of  showed  in  this  study,  examining  the 
the  correlation  between  transformational  relationship  between  the  transformational 
leadership  and  job  satisfaction  among  leadership  of  principals  and  the  job 
secondary school teachers are consistent with  satisfaction  of  secondary  school  teachers, 
existing literature in the field of organizational  aligns with the preceding study findings. The 
psychology and educational leadership. Firstly,  positive  correlation  coefficient  of  0.216 
the  positive  correlation  coefficient  of  0.216  recommends a moderate positive relationship 
between transformational leadership and job  between  the  two  variables.  This  aligns  with 
satisfaction  aligns  with  previous  research  studies like those by Balogun, & Tella, (2022) 
findings.  Murphy,  &  Anderson,  (2020)  which establish parallel positive relationships 
conducted  a  study  that  established  the  between transformational leadership and job 
positive impact of transformational leadership  satisfaction  in  different  administrative 
on  employee  attitudes  and  well-being.  This  circumstances. 
suggests  that  when  principals  exhibit  higher  The highly significant p-value of 0.001 in 
levels  of  transformational  leadership  the  correlation  investigation  highlights  the 
behaviours, such as inspiring and motivating  strength  of  the  perceived  relationship 
116 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Transformational Leadership and Job Satisfaction; An Analytic Investigation    BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(1)” 
between transformational leadership and job  which  suggested  a  positive  relationship 
satisfaction,  confirming  its  statistical  between transformational leadership and job 
significance.  This  finding  resonates  with  the  satisfaction.  These  results  highlight  the 
scholarly work of Braun, Peus, Weisweiler, &  importance of transformational leadership in 
Frey, (2013), who accentuated the critical role  impelling the job satisfaction levels of teachers 
of  statistically  significant  relationships  in  within  secondary  school  situations. 
demonstrating  the  credibility  of  associations  Transformational  leaders  concluded  their 
between leadership styles and employee job  capability  to  inspire,  motivate,  and 
satisfaction.  In  addition,  the  considerable  intellectually stimulate their subordinates, and 
sample size of 254 participants increases the  contribute to a positive work environment that 
reliability  and  generalizability  of  the  study's  promotes  satisfaction  among  teachers.  This 
conclusions,  aligning  with  recognized  best  satisfaction,  in  turn,  has  implications  for 
practices supported by Carte, & Russell, (2003).  various  aspects  of  educational  practices, 
Notably, the seminal work of Bass, & Bass,  including  teaching  effectiveness,  staff 
(2009) is viewed as a significant illustration of  retention,  and  eventually,  student 
this  phenomenon.  Their  inclusive  research  consequences. 
delved  into  diverse  organizational  contexts  Recommendations 
and effectively revealed a purposeful positive  Based on the findings of this study, some 
correlation  between  transformational  recommendations developed for educational 
leadership  behaviours  and  employee  job  leaders, policymakers, and researchers: 
satisfaction levels.  Leadership  Development  Programs: 
Additionally,  a  wider  perspective  on  this  Educational  leaders  should  participate  in 
topic is provided by the understanding meta- leadership development programs that focus 
analysis conducted by Judge, Piccolo, & Ilies,  on promotion and attractive transformational 
(2004) Concluded a comprehensive synthesis  leadership  skills  among  principals  and  other 
of numerous studies, their findings significant  school  managers.  These  platforms  should 
relationship  between  transformational  accentuate the importance of encouraging a 
leadership  and  the  enhancement  of  job  compassionate  and  inspiring  work 
satisfaction  across  various  organizational  environment that arranges the well-being and 
situations.   satisfaction of teachers. 
The findings of this research support and  Supportive  Work  Environments:  School 
extend upon the conclusions drawn by Wang,  administrators  should  enthusiastically 
&  Howell,  (2012)  through  rigorous  data  encourage  supportive  work  environments 
analysis,  the  study  confirmed  a  strong  and  where  teachers  feel  valued,  respected,  and 
statistically  significant  positive  correlation  empowered.  This  may  encourage  open 
between transformational leadership and job  communication,  provide  occasions  for 
satisfaction.  professional growth and progress, and identify 
Conclusion  the aid of teachers to the school community. 
The  findings  of  this  study  expose  a  Continuing  Evaluation  and  Feedback: 
significant  positive  relationship  between  Regular evaluation and feedback mechanisms 
transformational leadership of principals and  should be executed to consider the leadership 
job  satisfaction  among  secondary  school  practices of principals and their influence on 
teachers. The Pearson correlation coefficient  teacher  job  satisfaction.  This  feedback  can 
analysis  indicates  a  strong  correlation  (r  =  appraise  targeted  interferences  and 
0.216, p < 0.001) between these two variables,  modifications to leadership attitudes to better 
providing empirical support for the hypothesis,  meet the needs and opportunities of teachers. 
117 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Transformational Leadership and Job Satisfaction; An Analytic Investigation    BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(1)” 
Future  Research  Directions:  Further  Caprara, G. V., Barbaranelli, C., Borgogni, L., &Steca, P. 
(2003). Efficacy beliefs as determinants of teachers' 
research  is  justified  to  explore  the  essential 
job  satisfaction. Journal  of  Educational 
mechanisms  concluded  in  which 
Psychology, 95(4), 821. 
transformational  leadership  influences  job 
Carte, T. A., & Russell, C. J. (2003). In pursuit of moderation: 
satisfaction  among  teachers.  Longitudinal  Nine  common  errors  and  their  solutions. MIS 
Quarterly, 479-501. 
studies  can  arrange  for an  understanding  of 
Chamundeswari,  S.  (2013).Job  satisfaction  and 
the  long-term  effects  of  transformational 
performance of school teachers. International Journal 
leadership  on  teacher  satisfaction  and  of  Academic  Research  in  Business  and  Social 
preservation.  As  well,  qualitative  research  Sciences, 3(5), 420. 
Cassar,  V.,  Bezzina,  F.,  &Buttigieg,  S.  C.  (2017).  The 
methods  can  offer  a  deeper  appreciation  of 
relationship between transformational leadership and 
the subjective experiences and observations of 
work  attitudes:  Comparing  mediating  influences  of 
teachers  concerning  their  relations  with  social  identity  and  the  psychological 
contract. Leadership  &  Organization  Development 
transformational leaders. 
Journal, 38(5), 646-661. 
The  positive  relationship  between 
Chaudhuri, S., & Ghosh, R. (2012). Reverse mentoring: A 
transformational  leadership  and  job 
social exchange tool for keeping the boomers engaged 
satisfaction identified in this study highlights  and  millennials  committed. Human  resource 
development review, 11(1), 55-76. 
the  importance  of  effective  leadership 
Dıab, N. (2022). The effects of artificial intelligence (AI) on 
practices  in  promoting  a  conducive  work 
the future jobs within the governmental organizations 
setting within secondary schools. By placing in 
in  Istanbul–Turkey (Master's  thesis,  İstanbul 
order  the  development  of  transformational  SabahattinZaimÜniversitesi). 
Dewi, S., Yulianto, R., &Ruswanti, E. (2022).The Effect of 
leadership skills and promotion of supportive 
Job Motivation, Job Satisfaction and Transformational 
work  environments,  educational  leaders  can 
Leadership  Style  on  Employee. European  Journal  of 
enhance teacher satisfaction and, eventually, 
Business and Management Research, 7(3), 107-113. 
add  to  better  educational  consequences  for  Dalton,  L.  C.  (2023). Relationship  Between 
Transformational  Leadership  on  Organizational 
students. 
Commitment  When  Accounting  for  Organizational 
References 
Trust:  A  Quantitative  Correlational  Study (Doctoral 
Abdul Wahab, J., MohdFuad, C. F., Ismail, H., & Majid, S.  dissertation, Northcentral University). 
(2014). Headmasters' transformational leadership and  Firmansyah, F., Prasojo, L. D., Jaedun, A., &Retnawati, H. 
their relationship with teachers' job satisfaction and  (2022). Transformational leadership effect on teacher 
teachers'  commitments. International  Education  performance in Asia: A meta-analysis. Cypriot Journal 
Studies, 7(13), 40-48.  of Educational Sciences, 17(6), 2127-2146. 
Adillo,  A.  E.,  &Netshitangani,  T.  (2019).Principals’  Givens,  R.  J.  (2008).  Transformational  leadership:  The 
leadership  roles  in  transforming  school  culture  for  impact  on  organizational  and  personal 
quality  education  in  urban  secondary  schools  in  outcomes. Emerging leadership journeys, 1(1), 4-24. 
Ethiopia. Journal  of  Gender,  Information  and  Heller,  D.  A.  (2004). Teachers  wanted:  Attracting  and 
Development in Africa (JGIDA), 8(Special Issue 2), 161- retaining good teachers. ASCD. 
180.  Huo, C., Waheed Akhtar, M., ArslanSafdar, M., Kashif Aslam, 
Bass,  B.  M.,  &  Bass,  R.  (2009). The  Bass  handbook  of  M.,  Abbas,  K.,  Hasan  Rafiq,  M.,  ...&SaadNajim  AL-
leadership:  Theory,  research,  and  managerial  Khafaji, D. (2020). Transformational leadership spur 
applications. Simon and Schuster.  organizational  commitment  among  optimistic 
Bass,  B.  M.,  &Riggio,  R.  E.  (2006). Transformational  followers:  The  role  of  psychological 
leadership.Psychology Press.  capital. International  Journal  of  Organizational 
Braun,  S.,  Peus,  C.,  Weisweiler,  S.,  &  Frey,  D.  (2013).  Leadership, 9(2), 93-104. 
Transformational  leadership,  job  satisfaction,  and  Jena, L. K., Pradhan, S., &Panigrahy, N. P. (2018). Pursuit of 
team performance: A multilevel mediation model of  organisational trust: Role of employee engagement, 
trust. The Leadership Quarterly, 24(1), 270-283.  psychological  well-being  and  transformational 
Balogun,  A.  L.,  &Tella,  A.  (2022).  Modelling  and  leadership. Asia  Pacific  Management  Review, 23(3), 
investigating  the  impacts  of  climatic  variables  on  227-234. 
ozone  concentration  in  Malaysia  using  correlation  Judge, T. A., Piccolo, R. F., &Ilies, R. (2004).The forgotten 
analysis with random forest, decision tree regression,  ones?The  validity  of  consideration  and  initiating 
linear  regression,  and  support  vector  structure  in  leadership  research. Journal  of  Applied 
regression. Chemosphere, 299, 134250.  Psychology, 89(1), 36. 
118 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| Caprara, G. V., Barbaranelli, C., Borgogni, L., &Steca, P.   | None                                                  |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                              | (2003). Efficacy beliefs as determinants of teachers' |
|                                                              | job satisfaction. Journal of Educational              |
|                                                              | Psychology, 95(4), 821.                               |

| Carte, T. A., & Russell, C. J. (2003). In pursuit of moderation:   | None                                        |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------|
|                                                                    | Nine common errors and their solutions. MIS |
|                                                                    | Quarterly, 479-501.                         |

| Chamundeswari, S. (2013).Job satisfaction and   | None                                                  |
|:------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                 | performance of school teachers. International Journal |
|                                                 | of Academic Research in Business and Social           |
|                                                 | Sciences, 3(5), 420.                                  |

| Cassar, V., Bezzina, F., &Buttigieg, S. C. (2017). The   | None                                                 |
|:---------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------|
|                                                          | relationship between transformational leadership and |
|                                                          | work attitudes: Comparing mediating influences of    |
|                                                          | social identity and the psychological                |
|                                                          | contract. Leadership & Organization Development      |
|                                                          | Journal, 38(5), 646-661                              |

| Chaudhuri, S., & Ghosh, R. (2012). Reverse mentoring: A   | None                                                 |
|:----------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------|
|                                                           | social exchange tool for keeping the boomers engaged |
|                                                           | and millennials committed. Human resource            |
|                                                           | development review, 11(1), 55-76.                    |

| Dıab, N. (2022). The effects of artificial intelligence (AI) on   | None                                                  |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                   | the future jobs within the governmental organizations |
|                                                                   | in Istanbul–Turkey (Master's thesis, İstanbul         |
|                                                                   | SabahattinZaimÜniversitesi).                          |

| Dewi, S., Yulianto, R., &Ruswanti, E. (2022).The Effect of   | None                                                  |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                              | Job Motivation, Job Satisfaction and Transformational |
|                                                              | Leadership Style on Employee. European Journal of     |
|                                                              | Business and Management Research, 7(3), 107-113.      |

| Dalton, L. C. (2023). Relationship Between   | None                                                |
|:---------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------|
|                                              | Transformational Leadership on Organizational       |
|                                              | Commitment When Accounting for Organizational       |
|                                              | Trust: A Quantitative Correlational Study (Doctoral |
|                                              | dissertation, Northcentral University).             |

| Abdul Wahab, J., MohdFuad, C. F., Ismail, H., & Majid, S.   | None                                                   |
|:------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                             | (2014). Headmasters' transformational leadership and   |
|                                                             | their relationship with teachers' job satisfaction and |
|                                                             | teachers' commitments. International Education         |
|                                                             | Studies, 7(13), 40-48.                                 |

| Firmansyah, F., Prasojo, L. D., Jaedun, A., &Retnawati, H.   | None                                                  |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                              | (2022). Transformational leadership effect on teacher |
|                                                              | performance in Asia: A meta-analysis. Cypriot Journal |
|                                                              | of Educational Sciences, 17(6), 2127-2146.            |

| Adillo, A. E., &Netshitangani, T. (2019).Principals’   | None                                                    |
|:-------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                        | leadership roles in transforming school culture for     |
|                                                        | quality education in urban secondary schools in         |
|                                                        | Ethiopia. Journal of Gender, Information and            |
|                                                        | Development in Africa (JGIDA), 8(Special Issue 2), 161- |
|                                                        | 180.                                                    |

| Givens, R. J. (2008). Transformational leadership: The   | None                                                |
|:---------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------|
|                                                          | impact on organizational and personal               |
|                                                          | outcomes. Emerging leadership journeys, 1(1), 4-24. |

| Huo, C., Waheed Akhtar, M., ArslanSafdar, M., Kashif Aslam   | None                                                 |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------|
|                                                              | M., Abbas, K., Hasan Rafiq, M., ...&SaadNajim AL-    |
|                                                              | Khafaji, D. (2020). Transformational leadership spur |
|                                                              | organizational commitment among optimistic           |
|                                                              | followers: The role of psychological                 |
|                                                              | capital. International Journal of Organizational     |
|                                                              | Leadership, 9(2), 93-104.                            |

| Bass, B. M., & Bass, R. (2009). The Bass handbook of   | None                                         |
|:-------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------|
|                                                        | leadership: Theory, research, and managerial |
|                                                        | applications. Simon and Schuster.            |

| Braun, S., Peus, C., Weisweiler, S., & Frey, D. (2013).   | None                                               |
|:----------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|
|                                                           | Transformational leadership, job satisfaction, and |
|                                                           | team performance: A multilevel mediation model of  |
|                                                           | trust. The Leadership Quarterly, 24(1), 270-283.   |

| Jena, L. K., Pradhan, S., &Panigrahy, N. P. (2018). Pursuit of   | None                                               |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                  | organisational trust: Role of employee engagement, |
|                                                                  | psychological well-being and transformational      |
|                                                                  | leadership. Asia Pacific Management Review, 23(3), |
|                                                                  | 227-234.                                           |

| Balogun, A. L., &Tella, A. (2022). Modelling and   | None                                                   |
|:---------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                    | investigating the impacts of climatic variables on     |
|                                                    | ozone concentration in Malaysia using correlation      |
|                                                    | analysis with random forest, decision tree regression, |
|                                                    | linear regression, and support vector                  |
|                                                    | regression. Chemosphere, 299, 134250.                  |

| Judge, T. A., Piccolo, R. F., &Ilies, R. (2004).The forgotten   | None                                                 |
|:----------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                 | ones?The validity of consideration and initiating    |
|                                                                 | structure in leadership research. Journal of Applied |
|                                                                 | Psychology, 89(1), 36.                               |

Transformational Leadership and Job Satisfaction; An Analytic Investigation    BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(1)” 
Lors,  J.  J.  (2020). The  Effect  of  Leadership  Styles  on  Stewart,  J.  (2006).  Transformational  leadership:  An 
Teachers' Job Satisfaction and Commitment (Doctoral  evolving  concept  examined  through  the  works  of 
dissertation, Universidad de Montemorelos (Mexico)).  Burns, Bass, Avolio, and Leithwood. Canadian journal 
Madigan,  D.  J.,  &  Kim,  L.  E.  (2021).  Towards  an  of educational administration and policy, (54). 
understanding of teacher attrition: A meta-analysis of  Spector, P. E. (1994). Job satisfaction survey, JSS. Retrieved 
burnout, job satisfaction, and teachers’ intentions to  March, 20, 2002. 
quit. Teaching and teacher education, 105, 103425.  Schermuly, C. C., Creon, L., Gerlach, P., Graßmann, C., & 
Metwally, A. H., El-Bishbishy, N., &Nawar, Y. S. (2014).The  Koch, J. (2022). Leadership styles and psychological 
impact  of  transformational  leadership  style  on  empowerment: A meta-analysis. Journal of Leadership 
employee satisfaction. The Business & Management  & Organizational Studies, 29(1), 73-95. 
Review, 5(3), 32-42.  Triraharjo, J., Aima, H., Sutawijaya, A., &BadawySaluy, A. 
Murphy, W. H., & Anderson, R. E. (2020). Transformational  (2020).  Effect  of  transformational  leadership  and 
leadership effects on salespeople’s attitudes, striving,  breakthrough  leadership  on  organizational 
and performance. Journal of Business Research, 110,  performance  through  the  variable  of  employee 
237-245.  satisfaction: a case study. 
Mehari, B. (2015). Transformational leadership and well- Top,  M.,  Akdere,  M.,  &Tarcan,  M.  (2015).  Examining 
being:  The  mediating  role  of  trust  in  leadership,  transformational  leadership,  job  satisfaction, 
meaningfulness and job satisfaction.  organizational commitment and organizational trust 
Nielsen, K., Yarker, J., Randall, R., &Munir, F. (2009). The  in  Turkish  hospitals:  public  servants  versus  private 
mediating  effects  of  team  and  self-efficacy  on  the  sector employees. The international journal of human 
relationship  between  transformational  leadership,  resource management, 26(9), 1259-1282. 
and job satisfaction and psychological well-being in  Wang, X. H. F., & Howell, J. M. (2012).A multilevel study of 
healthcare  professionals:  A  cross-sectional  transformational  leadership,  identification,  and 
questionnaire survey. International journal of nursing  follower  outcomes. The  Leadership  Quarterly, 23(5), 
studies, 46(9), 1236-1244.  775-790. 
Pawar,  A.  (2016).  Transformational  leadership:  Zahari, A. S. M., Salleh, A., Azlan, N. N. A., Syuhada, N., 
inspirational, intellectual and motivational stimulation  &Baniamin,  B.  R.  M.  R.  (2020).  The  factors  that 
in  business. International  Journal  of  Enhanced  influence job satisfaction among employees: A case 
Research  in  Management  &  Computer  study at Widad Education Sdn Bhd. Journal of Global 
Applications, 5(5), 14-21.  Business  and  Social  Entrepreneurship  (GBSE), 6(18), 
Rao, F. (2023). Examination of the Relationship Between  102-123. 
Principal  Leadership  Style  and  Teacher  Self-efficacy     
and Its Effect on Student Success in Rural Chinese K-12 
Schools (Doctoral  dissertation,  Delaware  State 
University). 
Swedana, I. N. (2023). The Role of Workload And Work 
Motivation In Influencing Performance Through Job 
Satisfaction. JurnalManajemen, 27(2), 401-427. 
Syed,  N.  H.,  Channa,  N.,  &Khoso,  I.  (2020).  Impact  of 
Change-Related  Communication  on  Organizational 
Commitment  with  the  Mediating  Effect  of  Job 
Satisfaction.  Case  of  Banks'  Merger  in 
Pakistan. Journal of Business & Economics, 12(2), 44-
66. 
Sirait,  D.  (2021).  The  Influence  of  Principal 
Transformational Leadership, Work Culture And Work 
Environment On Teacher Performance In State Senior 
High  Schools  Throughout  Banjarbaru  City. J 
AdvEducPhilos, 5(12), 391-400. 
Shatila, K., Agyei, F. B., &Aloulou, W. J. (2023). Impact of 
transformational  leadership  on  leadership 
effectiveness: the mediating effect of emotional skills 
in the Lebanese small and medium-sized enterprises 
context. Journal of Enterprising Communities: People 
and Places in the Global Economy. 
Stewart,  M.  A.  (2012). The  Superintendent-Principal 
Relationship and its Influence on Leadership Practices 
for  the  Urban  Elementary  Principal  and  the  Urban 
Superintendent.University of Cincinnati. 
119 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| Lors, J. J. (2020). The Effect of Leadership Styles on   | None                                                   |
|:---------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                          | Teachers' Job Satisfaction and Commitment (Doctoral    |
|                                                          | dissertation, Universidad de Montemorelos (Mexico)).   |
| Madigan, D. J., & Kim, L. E. (2021). Towards an          |                                                        |
|                                                          | understanding of teacher attrition: A meta-analysis of |
|                                                          | burnout, job satisfaction, and teachers’ intentions to |
|                                                          | quit. Teaching and teacher education, 105, 103425.     |

| Stewart, J. (2006). Transformational leadership: An   | None                                                 |
|:------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------|
|                                                       | evolving concept examined through the works of       |
|                                                       | Burns, Bass, Avolio, and Leithwood. Canadian journal |
|                                                       | of educational administration and policy, (54).      |

| Schermuly, C. C., Creon, L., Gerlach, P., Graßmann, C., &   | None                                                 |
|:------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------|
|                                                             | Koch, J. (2022). Leadership styles and psychological |
|                                                             | empowerment: A meta-analysis. Journal of Leadership  |
|                                                             | & Organizational Studies, 29(1), 73-95.              |

| Metwally, A. H., El-Bishbishy, N., &Nawar, Y. S. (2014).The   | None                                             |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|
|                                                               | impact of transformational leadership style on   |
|                                                               | employee satisfaction. The Business & Management |
|                                                               | Review, 5(3), 32-42.                             |

| Triraharjo, J., Aima, H., Sutawijaya, A., &BadawySaluy, A.   | None                                              |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------|
|                                                              | (2020). Effect of transformational leadership and |
|                                                              | breakthrough leadership on organizational         |
|                                                              | performance through the variable of employee      |
|                                                              | satisfaction: a case study.                       |

| Murphy, W. H., & Anderson, R. E. (2020). Transformational   | None                                                     |
|:------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                             | leadership effects on salespeople’s attitudes, striving, |
|                                                             | and performance. Journal of Business Research, 110,      |
|                                                             | 237-245.                                                 |

| Mehari, B. (2015). Transformational leadership and well-   | None                                              |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------|
|                                                            | being: The mediating role of trust in leadership, |
|                                                            | meaningfulness and job satisfaction.              |

| Top, M., Akdere, M., &Tarcan, M. (2015). Examining   | None                                                 |
|:-----------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------|
|                                                      | transformational leadership, job satisfaction,       |
|                                                      | organizational commitment and organizational trust   |
|                                                      | in Turkish hospitals: public servants versus private |
|                                                      | sector employees. The international journal of human |
|                                                      | resource management, 26(9), 1259-1282.               |

| Nielsen, K., Yarker, J., Randall, R., &Munir, F. (2009). The   | None                                                   |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                | mediating effects of team and self-efficacy on the     |
|                                                                | relationship between transformational leadership,      |
|                                                                | and job satisfaction and psychological well-being in   |
|                                                                | healthcare professionals: A cross-sectional            |
|                                                                | questionnaire survey. International journal of nursing |
|                                                                | studies, 46(9), 1236-1244.                             |

| Wang, X. H. F., & Howell, J. M. (2012).A multilevel study of   | None                                                |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                | transformational leadership, identification, and    |
|                                                                | follower outcomes. The Leadership Quarterly, 23(5), |
|                                                                | 775-790.                                            |

| Pawar, A. (2016). Transformational leadership:   | None                                                     |
|:-------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                  | inspirational, intellectual and motivational stimulation |
|                                                  | in business. International Journal of Enhanced           |
|                                                  | Research in Management & Computer                        |
|                                                  | Applications, 5(5), 14-21.                               |

| Zahari, A. S. M., Salleh, A., Azlan, N. N. A., Syuhada, N.,   | None                                                |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------|
|                                                               | &Baniamin, B. R. M. R. (2020). The factors that     |
|                                                               | influence job satisfaction among employees: A case  |
|                                                               | study at Widad Education Sdn Bhd. Journal of Global |
|                                                               | Business and Social Entrepreneurship (GBSE), 6(18), |
|                                                               | 102-123.                                            |

| Rao, F. (2023). Examination of the Relationship Between   | None                                                    |
|:----------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                           | Principal Leadership Style and Teacher Self-efficacy    |
|                                                           | and Its Effect on Student Success in Rural Chinese K-12 |
|                                                           | Schools (Doctoral dissertation, Delaware State          |
|                                                           | University).                                            |

| Swedana, I. N. (2023). The Role of Workload And Work   | None                                              |
|:-------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------|
|                                                        | Motivation In Influencing Performance Through Job |
|                                                        | Satisfaction. JurnalManajemen, 27(2), 401-427.    |

| Syed, N. H., Channa, N., &Khoso, I. (2020). Impact of   | None                                                  |
|:--------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                         | Change-Related Communication on Organizational        |
|                                                         | Commitment with the Mediating Effect of Job           |
|                                                         | Satisfaction. Case of Banks' Merger in                |
|                                                         | Pakistan. Journal of Business & Economics, 12(2), 44- |
|                                                         | 66.                                                   |

| Sirait, D. (2021). The Influence of Principal   | None                                               |
|:------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|
|                                                 | Transformational Leadership, Work Culture And Work |
|                                                 | Environment On Teacher Performance In State Senior |
|                                                 | High Schools Throughout Banjarbaru City. J         |
|                                                 | AdvEducPhilos, 5(12), 391-400.                     |

| Shatila, K., Agyei, F. B., &Aloulou, W. J. (2023). Impact of   | None                                                    |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                                | transformational leadership on leadership               |
|                                                                | effectiveness: the mediating effect of emotional skills |
|                                                                | in the Lebanese small and medium-sized enterprises      |
|                                                                | context. Journal of Enterprising Communities: People    |
|                                                                | and Places in the Global Economy.                       |

| Stewart, M. A. (2012). The Superintendent-Principal   | None                                                   |
|:------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------|
|                                                       | Relationship and its Influence on Leadership Practices |
|                                                       | for the Urban Elementary Principal and the Urban       |
|                                                       | Superintendent.University of Cincinnati.               |

Transformational Leadership and Job Satisfaction; An Analytic Investigation    BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(1)” 
Annexure A  Florida  Tampa,  FL  33620 
 
Paul Spector <paul@paulspector.com>  USApaul@paulspector.comWebsite: https://p  
  To  me  aulspector.com/For  more  on  my  Job   
  Dear Inaam:  Satisfaction 
You have my permission to use the original  book: https://paulspector.com/books/job-
JSS in your research. You can find copies of the  satisfaction/ 
scale in the original English and several other   
languages, as well as details about the scale's   
development and norms, in the Paul’s No Cost 
Assessments  section of  my 
website: https://paulspector.com. I allow free 
use for noncommercial research and teaching 
purposes in return for the sharing of results. 
This includes student theses and dissertations, 
as  well  as  other  student  research  projects. 
Copies  of  the  scale  can  be  reproduced  in  a 
thesis or dissertation as long as the copyright 
notice is included, "Copyright Paul E. Spector 
1994,  All  rights  reserved."  Results  can  be 
shared by providing an e-copy of a published 
or  unpublished  research  report  (e.g.,  a 
dissertation).  You  also  have  permission  to 
translate the JSS into another language under 
the same conditions in addition to sharing a 
copy  of  the  translation  with  me.  Be  sure  to 
include  the  copyright  statement,  as  well  as 
credit the person who did the translation with 
the year. 
The  JSS-2  is  an  improved  commercial 
version for which there is a fee as explained 
here: https://paulspector.com/assessments/j
ob-satisfaction-survey-2/. 
For  additional  assessment  resources 
including an archive of measures developed by 
others, check out the assessment section of 
my  website  for  organizational 
measures https://paulspector.com/assessme
nts/  and my companion site for general and 
mental  health 
measures: https://www.stevenericspector.co
m/mental-health-assessment-archive/ 
Paul  Spector,  PhDAdjunct  Professor, 
School  of  Information  Systems  and 
ManagementMuma  College  of 
BusinessDistinguished  Professor  Emeritus, 
Department of PsychologyUniversity of South 
120 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| Dear Inaam:                                      |
|:-------------------------------------------------|
| You have my permission to use the original       |
| JSS in your research. You can find copies of the |
| scale in the original English and several other  |
| languages, as well as details about the scale's  |
| development and norms, in the Paul’s No Cost     |
| Assessments section of my                        |
| website: https://paulspector.com. I allow free   |
| use for noncommercial research and teaching      |
| purposes in return for the sharing of results.   |
| This includes student theses and dissertations,  |
| as well as other student research projects.      |
| Copies of the scale can be reproduced in a       |
| thesis or dissertation as long as the copyright  |
| notice is included, "Copyright Paul E. Spector   |
| 1994, All rights reserved." Results can be       |
| shared by providing an e-copy of a published     |
| or unpublished research report (e.g., a          |
| dissertation). You also have permission to       |
| translate the JSS into another language under    |
| the same conditions in addition to sharing a     |
| copy of the translation with me. Be sure to      |
| include the copyright statement, as well as      |
| credit the person who did the translation with   |
| the year.                                        |
| The JSS-2 is an improved commercial              |
| version for which there is a fee as explained    |
| here: https://paulspector.com/assessments/j      |
| ob-satisfaction-survey-2/.                       |
| For additional assessment resources              |
| including an archive of measures developed by    |
| others, check out the assessment section of      |
| my website for organizational                    |
| measures https://paulspector.com/assessme        |
| nts/ and my companion site for general and       |
| mental health                                    |
| measures: https://www.stevenericspector.co       |
| m/mental-health-assessment-archive/              |