 
Annals of Actuarial Science (2023), 1–27 
 
doi:10.1017/S1748499522000227
ORIGINAL RESEARCH PAPER 
Long-term option pricing with a lower reflecting barrier 
1Omotayo  Johncally  Abere,  Department  of  Actuarial  Science  &  Insurance, 
University of Lagos, Nigeria. (johncally68@yahoo.com) 
Omotayo Johncally Abere is a technical writer and 
faculty  member  of  the  department  of  Actuarial 
Science & Insurance, University of Lagos, Nigeria. 
He  has  published  a  lot  of  research  article  and 
scholarlarly  books.  He  is  currently  doing  job  in 
Microsoft as Actuarial Scientist and Programmer. He 
got several awards nationally and internationally.  
 
 
 
 
Abstract 
This paper considers the pricing of long-term options on assets such as housing, where either government 
intervention or the economic nature of the asset limits large falls in prices. The observed asset price is 
modelled by a geometric Brownian motion (“the notional price”) reflected at a lower barrier. The resulting 
observed price has standard dynamics but with localised intervention at the barrier, which allows arbitrage 
with interim losses; this is funded by the government’s unlimited powers of intervention, and its exploitation 
is subject to credit constraints. Despite the lack of an equivalent martingale measure for the observed price, 
options on this price can be expressed as compound options on the arbitrage-free notional price, to which 
standard risk-neutral arguments can be applied. Because option deltas tend to zero when the observed price 
approaches the barrier, hedging with the observed price gives the same results as hedging with the notional 
price and so exactly replicates option payoffs. Hedging schemes are not unique, with the cheapest scheme 
for any derivative being the one which best exploits the interventions at the barrier. The price of a put is 
clear: direct replication has a lower initial cost than synthetic replication, and the replication portfolio 
always has positive value. The price of a call is ambiguous: synthetic replication has a lower initial cost 
than direct replication, but the replication portfolio may give interim losses. So the preferred replication 
strategy (and hence price) of a call depends on what margin payments need to be made on these losses. 
Keywords: Long-term option pricing; No-negative-equity guarantee; Put option; Arbitrage; Reflecting barrier 
1.  Introduction 
Thomas (2021) considered the valuation of no-negative equity guarantees (NNEG), essentially a 
form of long-term put option, in the presence of a lower reflecting barrier under the spot price. The 
pricing method was to integrate the option’s intrinsic value over a drift-neutralised density for the 
asset price at maturity. In Appendix B of that paper, I noted a puzzle: when the same method is 
applied to price a call option, the resulting pairs of call and put prices for the same strike do not 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

|                                                                                                                |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Abstract                                                                                                       |
| This paper considers the pricing of long-term options on assets such as housing, where either government       |
| intervention or the economic nature of the asset limits large falls in prices. The observed asset price is     |
| modelled by a geometric Brownian motion (“the notional price”) reflected at a lower barrier. The resulting     |
| observed price has standard dynamics but with localised intervention at the barrier, which allows arbitrage    |
| with interim losses; this is funded by the government’s unlimited powers of intervention, and its exploitation |
| is subject to credit constraints. Despite the lack of an equivalent martingale measure for the observed price, |
| options on this price can be expressed as compound options on the arbitrage-free notional price, to which      |
| standard risk-neutral arguments can be applied. Because option deltas tend to zero when the observed price     |
| approaches the barrier, hedging with the observed price gives the same results as hedging with the notional    |
| price and so exactly replicates option payoffs. Hedging schemes are not unique, with the cheapest scheme       |
| for any derivative being the one which best exploits the interventions at the barrier. The price of a put is   |
| clear: direct replication has a lower initial cost than synthetic replication, and the replication portfolio   |
| always has positive value. The price of a call is ambiguous: synthetic replication has a lower initial cost    |
| than direct replication, but the replication portfolio may give interim losses. So the preferred replication   |
| strategy (and hence price) of a call depends on what margin payments need to be made on these losses.          |

  2  R. Guy Thomas 
satisfy the standard put-call parity. I suggested a number of pragmatic reasons why we should 
nevertheless adopt the price of the put for NNEG valuation, and assign some residual ambiguity to 
the price of the call. Similarly, in an antecedent paper, Hertrich (2015, pp. 239–240) writes that in 
the presence of a lower reflecting barrier “. . .the put price is unique and equals the risk-neutral 
price. . .the call market price can take on at least these two values, i.e. the risk-neutral call price 
and the imputed call price via the standard put-call parity.” 
The failure of standard put-call parity hints that the barrier model allows some sort of arbitrage. 
Previous papers (Thomas, 2021; Hertrich & Zimmermann, 2017; Hertrich, 2015; Veestraeten, 2008, 
2013) all noted that the assumed instantaneous nature of reflection rules out the obvious arbitrage of 
buying when the spot price is exactly at the barrier, and then selling a moment later after it rises. 
However, this argument renders impractical only immediate arbitrage (arbitrage with 
The Author(s), 2023. Published by Cambridge University Press on behalf of Institute and Faculty of Actuaries. This is an Open Access article, 
C 
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution licence (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits 
 
unrestricted re-use, distribution and reproduction, provided the original article is properly cited.
no interim losses); it does not exclude arbitrage with interim losses, which requires credit to cover 
losses which may be incurred before an eventual gain. 
Strategies  of  this  type  are  indeed  feasible  in  the  barrier  model.  This  raises  economic  and 
mathematical  issues,  which  were  not  addressed  in  any  of  the  previous  papers  just  cited. 
Economically, it implies that the realism of the assumed price process depends on the government’s 
unlimited powers of intervention, and/or credit limits or other institutional features that limit scaling 
of  the  arbitrage.  Mathematically,  the  existence  of  any  arbitrage  strategy,  irrespective  of  its 
practicality of implementation, implies that no equivalent martingale measure for the asset exists; 
and therefore that the usual risk-neutral pricing arguments cannot be applied, at least in their standard 
form. 
Nevertheless, delta hedging using the formulas in previous papers does exactly replicate option 
payoffs. The reasons are as follows. Although geometric Brownian motion (GBM) reflected at a 
lower barrier (“the observed price”) is not arbitrage-free, the underlying geometric Brownian motion 
(“the notional price”) is arbitrage-free. Furthermore, options on the observed price can be expressed 
as compound options on the notional price, and then expectations taken under a riskneutral measure 
for the notional price. Although the notional price is not available for hedging, it turns out that for 
the hedging schemes we need to operate, hedging with the observed price achieves the same results 
as hedging with the notional price. This is because the deltas for options always tend to zero as the 
observed price approaches the localised irregularity at the barrier; and everywhere else, the observed 
price has the same standard GBM dynamics as the notional price. 
The resulting replicating portfolios are martingales under the risk-neutral measure for the notional 
price. But the observed price is a sub-martingale under this measure, because of the interventions at 
the barrier (which push the observed price upwards, and are not cancelled by the removal of the drift 
in the standard risk-neutralisation). Similarly, the cheapest replication of a forward contract is a sub-
martingale; this is because the cheapest replication of a forward contract has a static positive delta 
and  so  is  positively  exposed  to  the  interventions  at  the  barrier.  These  different  dynamics  of 
replicating portfolios – options martingale, forward contracts sub-martingale – inevitably mean that 
call, put and forward prices together will not satisfy the standard put-call parity. 
Put-call parity can be restored by invoking the construct of synthetic replication for one of the 
options, in contrast with the more common direct replication. For a call, direct replication involves 
a continuously varying portfolio which is long a fraction of the underlying asset and short cash. 
Synthetic replication involves two elements: a long position in a forward contract and a long position 
in a put, both with the same strike as the call we wish to replicate. The synthetic call price is then 
determined as the lowest cost of replicating each of these two elements separately (via a static 
position for the forward and a dynamic position for the put). An analogous synthetic replication can 
be constructed for a put. 
Under standard models for the asset price, direct replication and synthetic replication have the 
same costs. But in the presence of the reflecting barrier, their costs can differ. I argue that arbitrage 
will tend to enforce the lowest replication cost as the price for any derivative (I call this “the principle 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  3 
of the lowest price,” in contrast to the usual “law of one price”). For a put, direct replication always 
has a lower initial cost, and never produces interim losses. So direct replication is unambiguously 
the best way of replicating a put. For a call, synthetic replication always has a lower initial cost, but 
it produces interim losses. So the preferred replication strategy (and hence price) of a call depends 
on what margin payments need to be made on these losses. 
If the price of a call is ambiguous, then put-call parity is also in general ambiguous. But we can 
define it if we assume that no margin payments are required on interim losses. In that case, synthetic 
replication becomes unambiguously preferable for a call, so put-call parity then takes the form 
Synthetic Call price – Put price = Forward Contract price. 
Earlier work on option pricing in the presence of a lower reflecting barrier includes the following 
papers. For calls with a lower barrier, Veestraeten (2008) derived the direct replication price, and 
Veestraeten (2013) considered a combination of upper and lower barriers to represent a foreign 
exchange currency band. For puts with a lower barrier, Hertrich & Veestraeten (2013) stated the 
result, and Hertrich (2015) and Hertrich & Zimmermann (2017) gave a full derivation. Thomas 
(2021) suggested an application to the valuation of no-negative-equity guarantees on equity release 
mortgages. Each of these papers focused mainly either on call options (Veestraeten, 2008, 2013) or 
on put options (Hertrich, 2015; Hertrich & Zimmermann, 2017; Thomas, 2021), but not both; this 
may explain why the complications highlighted in the present paper have not previously been 
considered.  In  earlier  actuarial  literature,  Gerber  &  Pafumi  (2000)  and  Imai  &  Boyle  (2001) 
considered the related problem of pricing of a dynamic guarantee on an investment fund, where the 
guarantee is modelled as a reflecting barrier under the fund price. Ko et al. (2010) considered an 
investment fund with two reflecting barriers, representing a lower guarantee plus withdrawals to 
prevent the fund from exceeding an upper limit. The formulas for these related problems can be 
reconciled with those in this paper, see e.g. Appendix D of Thomas (2021). Buckner et al. (2022) 
draw  attention  to  the  arbitrage  opportunities  created  by  a  reflecting  barrier;  I  agree  with  this 
observation, but not with the inference that the option formulas have no justification. 
The conclusions of this paper can be compared with those in the literature on option prices in the 
presence of a bubble in the price of the underlying asset (e.g. Cox & Hobson, 2005; Heston et al. 
2007; Jarrow et al., 2007; Protter, 2013). In both settings, the standard put-call parity fails to hold. 
In a bubble, the current asset price exceeds its discounted expectation under the pricing measure at 
a  future  date;  but  with  a  lower  reflecting  barrier,  this  inequality  is  reversed.  Protter  (2013) 
distinguishes between “fundamental” and “market” prices for options in the presence of a bubble, 
where the fundamental price is the discounted expectation under the risk-neutral measure. For a put, 
market and fundamental prices in a bubble are the same (as in the barrier model); but for a call, 
market and fundamental prices differ by an amount equivalent to the difference Synthetic Call – Call 
in this paper (Protter, 2013, Equation (80)). His difference has the opposite sign to ours: in a bubble, 
the current market price of the asset (or a call on the asset) exceeds its discounted expectation under 
the pricing measure, but with a lower reflecting barrier, the inequality is reversed. 
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section 2 gives the set-up of the barrier model and 
the derivation of option prices and deltas, and reports simulations showing satisfactory convergence 
of pricing errors and replication errors. Section 3 considers put-call parity, and hence direct and 
synthetic replication; it concludes that a put should always be priced by direct replication, but the 
price of a call is ambiguous. Application of the points made in section 3 is illustrated in section 4 for 
a put, and section 5 for a call. Section 6 considers the arbitrage possibilities in the barrier model, and 
their  susceptibility  to  credit  limits  and  other  institutional  constraints.  Section  7  gives  further 
discussion, and section 8 states conclusions. 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  4  R. Guy Thomas 
2.  The Barrier Model 
2.1. Concept 
The barrier is a metaphor for policymaker actions, such as interventions to support prices after a 
large fall in the housing market (Thomas, 2021, section 2), or central bank currency purchases 
supporting  a  floor  under  an  exchange  rate  (Hertrich,  2015;  Hertrich  &  Zimmermann,  2017). 
Alternatively, the barrier represents the different economic properties of underlying assets such as 
freehold land (an absolute claim), compared with the underlying assets such as equity (a residual 
claim) as in many other option valuations (Thomas, 2021, section 3). 
We start with a standard geometric Brownian motion for the price process. We then impose a 
reflecting barrier somewhere below the lower of the spot price and the strike price (i.e. b < min (S, 
K)). The strike can be either lower or higher than the spot price, i.e. in or out of the money. 
Figure1.  Onesimulationfortheprices  N  t  and S  t  .   
If the spot price hits the barrier, reflection occurs instantaneously and with infinitesimal size. We 
can think of this as the State making a small purchase, just sufficient to prevent the price falling 
below the barrier. The instantaneous nature of the reflection means that the price does not spend any 
finite time at the barrier, so the obvious arbitrage of buying when the price is exactly at the barrier 
is not practically feasible (but there will be more to say about arbitrage later). 
2.2. Derivations 
The derivations make use of two price processes: a process for the observed price S in a world with 
t 
a reflecting barrier; and a process for the notional price N of an asset with the same starting value 
t 
today and same instantaneous dynamics, but in a world without a barrier. 
We assume that the notional price N is a geometric Brownian motion, specified as usual by 
t 
  dN N dW (1) 
t  t  t 
where μ is the real-world expected total return on the asset, q is the yield (assumed to be continuous), 
σ is the diffusion, and dW is the increment of a standard Wiener process. The solution of this is 
t 
  N   (2) 
t 
where N is the notional price today. 
0 
Now consider a lower reflecting barrier at price level b. Because of the barrier, the observed price 
process S will be 
t 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  5 
  S  .  (3) 
t 
In words: the process S is equal to N, if N has never gone below the barrier; or an up-rated version 
t  t t 
of N which “undoes” the maximum proportional deficit relative to the barrier, if it has. 
t 
Figure 1 shows how it works, for one unfavourable simulation over 25 years. 
 
Now transform to an arithmetic Brownian motion: divide Equation (3) by b (so that the barrier 
becomes 1) 
1 
and then take logs (so that the barrier becomes zero) . This gives: 
    (4) 
or, writing Z = ln(S/b), Y = ln(N/b), and noting ln(max(a,b)) = max(ln a, ln b), and N = b exp Y : 
t  t t  t n  n
  Z   (5) 
t 
or 
  Z = Y + L.  (6) 
t  t  t
Figure 2, which is the same simulation as in Figure 1 but with the transformation just given, 
shows how it works. Note that the blue line Z is obtained by taking the red line Y and then adding 
t  t 
L, the running maximum shortfall of Y below zero. L is a non-decreasing continuous process, which 
t t  t 
increases whenever Z touches the barrier. This construction ensures that Z never spends any finite 
t  t 
time at the barrier, and there are no jumps. L can also be thought of as the total quantum of the 
t 
interventions at the barrier between time 0 and time t; this quantum is finite, 
despite 
2 
the individual interventions being infinitesimal . 
Now note that Y is an arithmetic Brownian motion, for which Ito’s lemma gives 
t 
  dY  d ln N dW (7) 
t  t  t 
Then, note that Z is a semi-martingale, because it can be decomposed into a martingale (the W
t  t 
term) and two finite variation processes, the drift and the reflection. So we can also apply Ito’s 
lemma to Z = f(t, W, L) . This gives 
t 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  6  R. Guy Thomas 
  dZ  d ln S  dL (8) 
t  t  t 
1Strictly, we only need to take logs to give an arithmetic Brownian motion. The prior division by b just translates the 
barrier for the logged variable to zero, and so gives a more intuitive appearance in Figure 2. 
2The notation L arises because of a technical property of the stochastic process: the running maximum shortfall of Y
t  t 
below zero is equivalent to 0.5 times the “local time” of Z at zero, where local time is a measure of the total amount of time 
t 
between 0 and t that Z spends “very close” to zero. 
which is the same as Equation (7), plus dL, and second-order terms involving dLdW, dLdt, and dLdL 
t
which are all zero (because of the infinitesimal size of the increments at reflection). 
Comparing  Equations  (7)  and  (8),  we  see  that  reflected  Brownian  motion  Z has  the  same 
t 
stochastic process as the ordinary Brownian motion Y, except for the extra dL term. This term is 
t t 
zero at all times, except when Z touches the barrier (equivalently: Y makes a new low below zero), 
t  t 
where it generates an infinitesimal increment. 
The equivalent equations for the non-logged variables are 
  dN Ndt + σN dW (9) 
t  t t  t 
and 
  dS S dW + dL.  (10) 
t  t  t  t
By replacing the expected total return μ in Equation (9) with the risk-free rate r, we get a process 
for N for a new measure Q , under which the geometric Brownian motion N discounted at r – q is a 
t  N t 
martingale: 
  dN Ndt + σN dWQN  (11) 
t  t t  t
where WQN is a Wiener process under the new measure Q 3. 
t N
Earlier papers (Thomas, 2021; Hertrich & Zimmermann, 2017; Hertrich, 2015; Veestraeten 2008, 
2013) implicitly proceeded on the basis that this change of measure also turned the discounted 
observed price S into a martingale. But this is not correct, because of the dL term in Equation (10). 
t  t.
( )
The discounted notional price (red line in Figure 1) is a martingale under Q N (i.e. e− r −q TE QN[N T] = 
S ), but the discounted observed price (blue line) tends to be pushed upwards at the barrier, and so 
0
( )
is a sub-martingale under Q N(i.e. e− r −q TE QN[S T] ≥ S 0). 
The earlier papers obtained pricing formulas for options on S as discounted Q -expectations of 
t  N
terminal  payoffs.  The  usual  justification  is  that  because  the  Black-Scholes  partial  differential 
equation for the price of an option does not depend directly on investor preferences, its solution must 
be consistent with the expected value of the option in a world of risk-neutral preferences. In the 
Black-Scholes model, we represent risk-neutral preferences by setting the expected total return on 
the asset to be the same as the risk-free rate r, or stated differently, changing the measure to make 
the stochastic process for the discounted asset price a martingale. But in the presence of the barrier, 
we have already noted that discounted S is not a martingale under Q (see previous paragraph). 
t  N 
Furthermore, because of the interventions at the barrier, there is no change of drift that can make it 
so, and hence, the usual procedure does not work. Nevertheless, it turns out that Q -expectations do 
N
give hedging schemes which exactly replicate option payoffs, albeit for subtly different reasons from 
the usual argument. These reasons will be explained in section 2.4 below; but first, I state the Q -
N
expectations and the corresponding deltas as in Thomas (2021). For a call, the Q -expectation gives 
N
a price of 
  C  K) f (S ) dS (12) 
B  T T 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  7 
where the B-subscript on C denotes that this is a call in the presence of a lower reflecting barrier. 
B 
Conveniently, an expression is available for the density of Z as a function of Y, and hence also 
t  t
the re-transformed density for S
4  t 
= b exp Z, the observed price . This enables us to evaluate the 
t
3The notation Q (instead of the standard Q) emphasises that this is a risk-neutral measure for the notional price N, not 
N  t
the observed price S. 
t
4For the random walk reflected at zero, see e.g. Equation (2.4) in Gerber & Pafumi (2000); or for the re-transformed 
density, Equation (A.6) in Thomas (2021). 
integral as follows (for a full derivation, see Veestraeten, 2008): 
CB 
    (13) 
with K= strike price, S = current spot price5, T = term of the option, b = barrier price, risk-
free rate, q = asset yield (“deferment rate,” in the NNEG context), σ = volatility,  standard 
Normal cumulative distribution function, and 
z  , 
    with r = q.6 
We can make the following observations on Equation (13). 
 
7
(i)  The first line is the Black-Scholes formula for a call, and then there is the 1/θ term (say Call 
Adjustment). The Call Adjustment evaluates as positive, but reduces to 0 for b = 0, as 
expected. 
(ii)  The definition of S in Equation (3) excludes the possibility of S having touched the barrier 
t  t 
in the past, i.e. before the time designated as zero. To be consistent with this set-up, we 
should always define time 0 as the current time when we do an option valuation, and define 
the initial notional price as the current price (i.e. N = S ). The density underlying Equation 
0  0
(13) assumes this, i.e. it does not incorporate the possibility of an uprating effect on S from 
t 
past barrier touches, which would require extra terms. 
(iii)  Some care is needed with the volatility parameter σ. From Equation (1), we can see that σ is 
the annualised standard deviation of the logarithmic price change of the notional price N
t 
(i.e. the GBM volatility in the absence of the reflecting barrier). We can estimate σ by 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  8  R. Guy Thomas 
observing  the  standard  deviation  of  short-term  changes  in  the  observed  log  price, 
−√ , over a period in which the barrier has not been touched, and then applying√ 
 
the usual t-scaling to give an annualised value. But we cannot apply t-scaling to σ to give the 
standard deviation of ln over a long period T, because this will be reduced 
 
by the presence of the barrier. The usual √t-scaling is predicated on geometric Brownian 
motion, 
8 
but that is not what we have in the observed price . Similarly, for a put, 
the Q -expectation gives a price of 
N
K 
  P = e−rTE QN[K(K − S T) f (S T) dS (14) 
B  T 
5Strictly, S for consistency with S and S , but I drop the subscript where there is no realistic ambiguity. 
0  t  T
6For r = q, an alternative formula can be derived (Veestraeten, 2013, p. 960). But the formula above suffices for practical 
purposes, because it remains well-behaved when r is arbitrarily close to q, and has only an infinitesimal gap in the solution 
at 
r = q.7Strictly, the Black & Scholes (1973) formula modified for an asset with a continuous yield. But this detail is tedious 
(every argument in the paper still works if there is no yield), so I shall use “Black-Scholes” throughout. 
8The variance over interval T of a driftless arithmetic Brownian motion with σ = 1 is just T. With reflection at the starting 
level, the variance is reduced to  (Wiersema, 2008, p. 212 gives a proof). Our set-up has the barrier some 
distance below (rather than equal to) the starting level; this gives a smaller reduction in variance for the log-price. 
which evaluates as 
PB 
(15) 
with 
z  . 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  9 
For a full derivation, see Hertrich & Zimmermann (2017), supported by Appendices A to C of 
Hertrich & Zimmermann (2014). 
The delta for a call is found by differentiating Equation (13) with respect to the price of the 
underlying asset: 
  δC  .  (16) 
B 
Similarly, the delta for a put is: 
  δP  .  (17) 
B 
Derivations of Equations (16) and (17) are given in Appendix A (Supplementary Material). 
2.3. Simulation 
We now specify some example parameters which will be used where appropriate throughout the rest 
of the paper: let spot price S = 1, barrier b = 0.5, strike K = 1 (i.e. at-the-money), risk-free rate r = 
0.015, asset yield q = 0.01, volatility σ = 13%, and term T = 25 years. These parameters are intended 
to be representative of the NNEG context as in Thomas (2021). 
Simulation  is  useful  for  two  distinct  purposes:  to  verify  that  the  formulas  are  correct 
Q expectations, and to show that delta hedging based on these formulas exactly replicates option 
N
payoffs. 
For the first purpose, we simulate the asset price using Equations (2) and (3), but with the drift μ 
replaced by r, a fixed large number of time steps, and then vary the number of simulations. We 
measure pricing error as mean discounted option payoff less the analytical option formula. This is 
illustrated for a put in Figure 3, a log-log plot of confidence intervals for the pricing error against 
the number of simulations N . The slope of√ −0.5 shows that the Monte Carlo means converge on 
s
 
  the analytical formulas in line with 1 /  N . 
S
For the second purpose, we again simulate the asset price using Equations (2) and (3), but with a 
real-world drift μ = 0.03 (say), a fixed number of simulations, and then vary the number of time steps. 
We find that replication schemes based on initial wealth as per the call and put formulas in Equations 
(13) and (15), and deltas as in Equations (16) and (17), exactly replicate option payoffs, for any 
simulated real-world drift of the asset price. This is illustrated for a put in a Figure 4, 
 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  10  R. Guy Thomas 
 
Figure 3. Convergence of put pricing errors to zero with increasing number of simulations.
 
 
Figure 4. Convergence of put replication errors to zero with increasing number of time steps.
a log-log plot of standard deviations of replication errors against the number of time steps N . The 
T
slope of −0.5 shows that the replication errors converge in line with 1  . 
2.4. Why delta hedging exactly replicates option payoffs 
Section 2.2 noted that because of the irregularity at the barrier, the observed price  S is not a 
t 
martingale under Q , and so part of the standard justification for risk-neutral pricing does not apply 
N
to options on S. To understand why option replication by hedging schemes based on Q expectations 
t N
still works, first recall that the observed price S is a function of the notional price N. Specifically, 
t  t
the definition of S in Equation (3) can be written as 
t 
  S   (18) 
t 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  11 
where the max[.] term on the right is a lookback put (with fixed strike ln b) on the log-minimum of 
N. So a put on S can be expressed as a compound option on N , with payoff of 
T  T
  max(K    (19) 
or in words, a put on S is a put on: N times the exponential of a logarithmic lookback put on 
T  T 
the minimum of N . As for any derivative of N , the discounted Q -
9  T N
expectation of this payoff is a risk-neutral price with reference to N, and if N were available for 
t t 
hedging, we could replicate its payoff by hedging against N using a delta N, where P is the 
t  t t 
put price at time t. Then, note the following points: 
(i) By inspection of Equation (18): 
(a) When N is not at a new minimum below b, then S is just a piecewise scaling of N. 
t  t  t
Specifically, Equation (18) says S = Np˜t, where p˜t is the exponentiated payoff at time t of 
t  t
the logarithmic lookback put. The scaling factor,  p˜t = N for all S = b, is constant 
t  t 
throughout each interval when N is not at a new minimum below b, corresponding to flat 
t 
segments of the dashed line in Figure 2. (b) When N hits a new minimum below b, substituting 
t 
ln N for ln min N in Equation 
t  n 
0≤n≤t 
(18)  givesb. In other words: whenever N hits a new minimum 
t 
below b (equivalently: S touches the barrier), the dependence of S on N vanishes. So the 
t  t  t 
derivative N must also vanish. 
t 
(ii)  By the chain rule,  S (where P is the call price evaluated 
t   t  t 
at time t). So the option deltas with respect to S and N are related in the same way as in (i), 
t  t 
but with the inverse scaling 1 p˜t, and both must vanish when S touches the barrier. 
t 
(iii)  Hence for the compound option in Equation (19), hedging with N using a delta  
t  t
(which we cannot do) gives the same results as hedging with S using a delta S (which 
t  t 
we can do). 
(iv)  By inspection of Equation ( S → 0 as S → b, as expected from the “vanishing 
t 
derivative” argument above. The same is true of ∂C ∂S in Equation (16). 
B t 
A further intuition for the vanishing derivatives is as follows. When N (a geometric Brownian 
t 
motion) is near its current lookback minimum, p˜t, it will almost surely go further below this before 
time T, thus establishing a new minimum. So infinitesimal changes in p˜t (and hence S) at the current 
t
time will have no effect on the terminal value p˜T (and hence also, the terminal value S ). For a 
T
rigorous proof see the paper on lookback options by Goldman et al. (1979). 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

12  R. Guy Thomas 
Another way to look at this is via the stochastic process representations of N and S in Equations 
t  t 
(1) and (10). Notice that when S is above the barrier, it is just a scaled version of N, with the same 
t  t
GBM dynamics. When S touches the barrier, its dynamics deviate from those of N, because of the 
t  t
dL reflection term; but at this point, the option delta goes smoothly to zero, so our replicating 
t 
portfolio has no exposure to the dL term. Stated differently, under the measure Q , the discounted 
t  N
option replicating portfolios based on delta hedging using S are martingales; but S itself is a sub-
t  t 
martingale, because of the dL term. 
t 
 
 
Figure 5. Calls are inefficient, puts efficient.
The  above  arguments  explain  why  hedging  using  deltas  derived  from  Q -expectations 
N
successfully replicates option payoffs, despite the fact that S is not a martingale under Q . But the 
t  N
difference in dynamics between replicating portfolios (martingales) and asset price (sub-martingale) 
under Q hints at complications with put-call parity, which we examine next. 
N 
3.  Put-Call Parity 
3.1. Intuition: calls are inefficient, puts efficient 
We start with a graphical intuition that foreshadows much of what follows. Briefly, a call is an 
“inefficient” contract in the sense that its payoff may fail to give credit for the full effect of any 
interventions when the asset touches the barrier along the asset path to that payoff. A put does not 
have this feature, and so is “efficient.” 
To see this, look at Figure 5. Each panel shows one sample path for the notional price N (red), 
t 
and the corresponding observed price S (blue). Notice that in the left panel, the payoff of a call, 
t 
max(S − K, 0), is less than the accumulated effect (S – N ) of the interventions (or equivalently, the 
T  T  T
reflection) along the asset path. In contrast, in the right panel, the payoff of a put, max(K − S , 0), is 
T
reduced by the full accumulated effect (S – N ) of the interventions, compared with the much larger 
T  T
payoff if there were no barrier (i.e. if the red line represented the observed price). 
It is possible to draw paths where a call payoff includes the full effect of any interventions, and a 
put payoff includes none: the red line in each panel just needs to terminate above the strike. But for 
such paths, the put payoff is zero anyway (both before and after the interventions), so such paths are 
 
1 In the related context of pricing a guarantee on an investment fund, the connection to a lookback option on the 
minimum was previously noted by Imai & Boyle (2001). 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  13 
inconsequential for the valuation of a put. In general, whenever an option has a positive terminal 
payoff : 
(i)  a call payoff does not always include the full positive effect (left panel in Figure 5); but 
(ii)  a put payoff always does always include the full negative effect (right panel in Figure 5) 
of any interventions along the path to that payoff. 
Observations (i) and (ii) suggest that the barrier has, in some sense, a more fundamental effect 
on a put than on a call. Also note that: 
(a)  for a call, the barrier redistributes the density of payoffs compared to that which prevailswith 
no barrier, but without changing its support [0, ∞]; but 
(b)  for a put, the barrier both redistributes the density of payoffs, and narrows its support from[0, 
K] to [0, K – b]. 
Observations (a) and (b) again suggest that the barrier has a more fundamental effect on a put 
than on a call. 
Now recall that by parity, call and put payoffs are mutually redundant: if we have one plus the 
forward contract, we can always synthesise the payoff of the other. So rather than directly replicating 
a call, it might be cheaper to synthesise its payoff as a forward plus a put. 
3.2. Definition of put-call parity 
Instead of the usual general reasoning about payoffs, it is useful for our present purposes to derive 
put-call parity by explicitly differencing call and put prices: 
  Call price − Put price = Forward Contract price  (20) 
In the Black-Scholes model appropriate for the notional price N (a geometric Brownian motion), 
t 
if the Black-Scholes call and put prices are C and P (assuming the same strike K as the forward 
contract), we have 
C   
and then noting that the sums of the Normal functions (e.g. )  each reduce to 1, 
this gives 
  C − P = Ne−qT − Ke−rT  (22) 
where the right-hand side corresponds to the no-arbitrage price of a forward contract, as expected. 
In the Black-Scholes model, Equation (22) holds at all times over the term. Stated differently, all of 
the following are true: 
(i)  the terminal payoffs of (a) a long call, short put portfolio, and (b) a forward contract, 
areequal 
(ii)  the prices of (a) and (b) today are equal 
(iii)  the replicating portfolios for (a) and (b) are equal at all interim times, and hence have 
thesame dynamics. 
I shall refer to points (i) to (iii) as the “triple equivalence” of put-call parity. 
For the barrier model, following the same approach of differencing call and put prices 
(Equations (13) and (15)), we obtain 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

14  R. Guy Thomas 
CB 
(23) 
which is larger than the standard parity Se−qT − Ke−rT, and reduces to that only for b = 0. 
The right-hand side of Equation (23) can be replicated as the difference of the two replication 
strategies implied by the left-hand side . As with the 
10 
constituent options, hedging against the observed price S using a 1 p˜t scaled delta is equivalent to 
t 
hedging against the notional price− N using an unscaled delta. The replicating portfolio starts off 
t 
higher than Se−qT Ke−rT, then 
10With slight abuse of notation, I shall use C and P to refer to both replicating strategies and the initial costs of those 
B  B 
strategies, as the context requires (and similarly for other replicating strategies, later in the paper). 
evolves as a martingale under Q (the difference of two martingales is itself a martingale) and reaches 
N 
the payoff of a forward contract S − X at maturity. If we denote this “martingale forward contract” 
T 
as F , we then have: 
B
  C − P = F (24) 
B  B  B 
which satisfies the triple equivalence of put-call parity. 
But in the presence of the barrier, there is a simpler and cheaper way of replicating the payoff of 
a forward contract. Recall the static no-arbitrage argument that underlies the standard forward 
contract price Se−qT − Ke−rT: the payoff of a forward can be replicated by borrowing to buy e−qT units 
of the asset and continuously reinvesting the income, and this price is enforced because any other 
price creates a static arbitrage. Then note that in the presence of the barrier, the argument still works 
in the same way. The static hedge position in the asset means that whenever reflection at the barrier 
affects the spot price, it will affect the replicating portfolio in the same way. So a static position in 
the asset, funded by borrowing, still replicates the payoff of a forward contract in the presence of the 
barrier (and this is easily verified by simulation). 
The forward contract defined in this way, say SF B = Se−qT − Ke−rT, has the same terminal payoff as 
the martingale forward contract F in Equations (23) and (24), but a different initial price, and 
B 
different interim dynamics. Because of the interventions at the barrier, the replicating portfolio for 
SF is a sub-martingale (and hence the S-prefix). Note that the cheapness of this replication scheme 
B 
arises because it fully exploits the interventions at the barrier. In contrast, for the martingale forward 
contract F , the replication scheme implied by the right-hand side of Equation (23) has the same 
B
property as the call and put replication strategies on the left-hand side: both deltas go to zero as the 
spot  price  approaches  the  barrier,  and  so  the  replication  scheme  gains  no  benefit  from  the 
interventions. 
Now recall that the terminal payoff of a call can also be expressed synthetically as a forward 
contract plus a put, and similarly, the terminal payoff of a put can be expressed synthetically as a 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  15 
call less a forward. This suggests two further possible concepts of put-call parity in the presence of 
the barrier: replicating the put synthetically: 
CB − SPB = SFB  (25) 
or replicating the call synthetically: 
SCB − PB = SFB  (26) 
each of which satisfies the triple equivalence of put-call parity. Other combinations such as C − P
B  B 
= SF would not satisfy the triple equivalence: the terminal payoffs of the two sides are equal, but the 
B 
replicating portfolios at earlier times are not. The S-prefix in SC and SP can be thought of as denoting 
B  B 
both that the payoffs are replicated synthetically, and that the sub-martingale forward is used in their 
replication. 
The three putative statements of put-call parity in Equations (24), (25) and (26) all reference the 
same terminal payoff, i.e. they are all the same as regards leg (i) of the triple equivalence of putcall 
parity. But they are not all the same as regards leg (ii) (current prices) and leg (iii) (interim dynamics). 
Equations (25) and (26) replicate the same terminal payoff as Equation (24), but using a cheaper 
replication strategy, which exploits the interventions at the barrier. 
3.3. Principle of the lowest price 
The fact that replication schemes are not unique does not necessarily mean that all replication 
schemes are equally sensible. Anyone offering to buy a derivative for more than its lowest cost of 
replication creates a potential arbitrage: sell to the person offering a higher price, replicate the 
contingent payoff you need to make by setting aside its lowest replication cost, and pocket the 
 
 
Figure 6. Clockwise from top left: paths of spot price, and replicating portfolios for forward, put and call.
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

16  R. Guy Thomas 
difference. And in contexts such as NNEG valuation, it seems reasonable that an insurer should be 
permitted to value a put at the cost of the cheapest strategy that replicates the payoff, rather than 
some alternative higher-cost strategy. 
This argument suggests the principle that the market price of any derivative should be the cost of 
the cheapest replication scheme, that is, the scheme which best exploits the interventions at the 
barrier. We might call this the principle of the lowest price, in place of the conventional law of one 
price. This leaves aside the question of any margin or collateral required by each strategy, to which 
we shall return below. 
3.4. Replication paths 
It is now useful to examine some typical simulation paths for the various replicating strategies 
underlying Equations (24)–(26). Figure 6 shows (clockwise from top left): a single path for S; the 
t
corresponding paths for martingale and sub-martingale forward replications (green); the direct and 
synthetic put replications (blue); and the direct and synthetic call replications (red). I make the 
following observations (these points are general, despite only a single pair of paths being shown for 
each comparison). 
(1)  In each of the three coloured panels, the difference between the two initial costs, and the 
subsequent replicating paths, is the same F − SF . In other words, the fundamental point is 
B  B
that there are two ways of replicating the forward contract: F which gains no benefit from 
B 
the interventions, and SF which fully exploits the interventions. In each coloured panel, the 
B 
initial difference is the (discounted) effect of the interventions on the asset price over the 
whole term. If we rely on the cheaper replicating strategy in each panel, 
we 
11 
implicitly anticipate the effect of the free government interventions in our prices.  The 
initial value of the difference is Equation (23) less SF , that is: FB 
B
 
    (27) 
which is independent of the strike K, as expected. 
(2)  For a forward contract (green, upper right panel), the sub-martingale forward SF is at all 
B 
interim times lower than the martingale forward F . The difference arises from the different 
B
replication strategies: F misses the interventions, SF captures them. But it might also be 
B  B 
rationalised as a reflection of different mark-to-market risks: F has a delta of δ − δ , and 
B  CB  PB
SF B has a higher delta of e−q(T −t) at interim time t (visually, SF B has larger drawdowns). Note 
that SF never exceeds F ; the extra mark-to-market risk is entirely downside risk. On the 
B  B
other hand, SF (a static position) has the advantage that it is much simpler to hedge than F
B  B 
(a dynamic position). 
(3)  For a put (blue, lower right panel), the direct replication P is lower at all interim times than 
B 
the synthetic replication SP . This is intuitive: P has no exposure to the interventions at the 
B B 
barrier  (because  the  delta  goes  to  zero);  but  SP B has  a  short  position  of  −e−q(T −t) (plus 
reinvestment  of  income)  at  the  barrier  and  so  suffers  losses  from  the  interventions.  If 
someone offers to buy the put at the higher price SP , an arbitrageur can write the put at that 
B
price, replicate the contingent payoff he needs to make by setting aside an amount P , and 
B
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  17 
pocket the difference. Since direct replication is always cheaper, this suggests that a put 
should be replicated directly. 
(4)  Conversely, for a call (red, lower left panel), the synthetic replication SC is lower at all 
B 
interim times than the direct replication C . This is again intuitive: SC has a long position of 
B B 
e−q(T −t) when the spot price touches the barrier at interim time t, and so fully benefits from all 
the interventions, but C misses out on all the interventions. Since synthetic replication is 
B 
always cheaper, this suggests that a call should be replicated synthetically (but see the caveat 
at (6) below). 
(5)  Now put the three previous points together, and apply the “principle of the lowest price” 
articulated in section 3.2 to each contract. This suggests that we can discard Equations (24) 
and (25), leaving Equation (26) as the preferred form of put-call parity in the presence of the 
barrier. That is, a call should always be replicated synthetically, and a put directly; and a 
forward contract should be replicated by a sub-martingale strategy (i.e. using the same 
formula as in the absence of the barrier). 
(6)  However, for a call (but not for a put) there is an important caveat: the red lower left panel 
in Figure 6 shows that the minimum-cost strategy SC has negative value at interim times 
B 
during the term. In contrast, the direct replication strategy C remains positive at all 
B 
interim times . So a putative arbitrageur, who sells the call to a person 
12 
offering the higher price C and replicates the contingent payoff he needs to make for SC , 
B  B
may need to make 
11We can alternatively extract the value of the interventions over the term, via a suitable delta-trading strategy. This 
possibility is discussed in section 6.2. 
12Note in passing that the issues discussed here never arise in the standard Black-Scholes model, where at all interim 
times (i) replication portfolios for both calls and puts have positive value and (ii) synthetic replication portfolios have identical 
value to direct replication portfolios. 
margin payments to cover these interim losses. The negative interim value of the strategy 
does have a lower limit enforced by the barrier, but its magnitude can substantially exceed 
− SC plus interest to the interim time . In the presence of credit or the 
B  13
initial saving C margin constraints, this is a possible reason why there may be few or no 
B 
sellers of the call at the price SC , or indeed at any price below C . 
B B
(7) It does not seem possible to give a general resolution of this point: the price of a call is 
ambiguous, depending on margin requirements in relation to interim losses of the strategy 
SC . Suppose the margin requirements are expressed as a fraction m (0 ≤ m ≤ 1) of the negative 
B
interim value of the strategy. We can then resolve the ambiguity for one extreme case: if 
there  are  no  margin  requirements  (m  =  0),  it  is  always  cheaper  to  replicate  the  call 
synthetically. On this assumption of “no margin requirements,” put-call parity takes the form 
given in Equation (26): 
  SCB − PB = SFB  (28) 
Synthetic call price – Direct put price = Sub-martingale forward price. 
But more realistically, for any other value of m, the best way to replicate a call depends on 
the availability of credit, and the configuration of S, K and b (and hence the maximum 
possible interim loss on the cheaper strategy  SC ). It might be thought that  m = 1 (i.e. 
B
replication portfolios plus margin required to have non-negative value at all interim times) 
dictates  that  a  call  should  be  replicated  directly.  But  this  is  not  so,  because  for  some 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

18  R. Guy Thomas 
configurations of S, K and b (particularly S → b or K → b), it may be cheaper to follow the 
strategy SC and also “pre-fund” the maximum possible margin payment. To see this, first 
B 
consider a strike equal to the barrier (K = b). For this parameterisation, there are no possible 
interim losses on either strategy SC or C , so the strategy SC is unambiguously 
B  B B 
 
14
cheaper . Now consider a strike slightly above the barrier. By continuity with the previous 
case, the maximum possible interim loss of SC is very small; and so following this strategy 
B 
(which captures the full effect of the interventions) and “pre-funding” the maximum margin 
payment will be cheaper than following strategy C (which completely misses out on the 
B 
interventions). On the other hand, if either the strike or spot price is well above the barrier 
(i.e. K >> b or S >> b), the maximum possible interim loss on the strategy SC is larger, and 
B 
so for high enough S or K, the strategy C will be cheaper than SC plus prefunding of the 
B  B 
maximum possible interim loss. Overall, for m = 1, the best strategy seems 
ambiguous: 
15 
it depends on the configuration of S, K and b . 
(8) The ambiguity regarding the call as discussed at (6) and (7) does not affect the put. The direct 
replication strategy P has the lowest initial cost, with any synthetic strategy having higher 
B 
cost; and P never has negative interim value; so P always the best replication strategy for 
B  B 
a put. This affirms the relevance of P for NNEG valuation, notwithstanding the ambiguity 
B 
about the price of a call. 
The next two sections illustrate the principles outlined above, first for the more straightforward 
case of puts and then for calls. 
13Particularly if the barrier at inception is far below the spot price, so that (i) the initial saving C − SC is small and (ii) 
B  B 
the possible interim losses are large. 
14Stated differently: if K = b, a call has the same payoff as a forward, and can be most cheaply replicated as such. 
15There is a loose analogy with the scenario of a bubble in the current price of the asset. Here, Cox & Hobson (2005) 
and Heston et al. (2007) emphasise that the call price is ambiguous, because it depends on margin requirements for the 
replication strategy with lowest initial cost. 
 
 
Figure 7. Put option: direct replication is cheaper than synthetic replication.
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  19 
4.  Illustration for a put Option 
We now return to the example parameters stated in section 2.3. Figure 7 illustrates the comparative 
costs of direct replication P and synthetic replication SP for a put option, for a range of barrier 
B  B 
levels as a fraction of the initial spot price. We can make the following observations on Figure 7. 
For a put, direct replication is always cheaper than synthetic replication. To understand this, note 
that the cheaper replication strategy is the one that is better positioned at the barrier. Then, observe 
that the deltas of the two replication strategies when the spot price touches the barrier at an interim 
time t are: 
synthetic replication:  t) 
direct replication: δ = 0. 
PB 
So the synthetic strategy is always badly positioned at the barrier (short the asset, which is subject 
to positive interventions). This makes it more expensive. 
The dashed straight red line representing the Black-Scholes price (i.e. ignoring the barrier) is 
shown  in  Figure  7  mainly  to  illustrate  that  our  preferred  valuation,  the  blue  line  P ,  sensibly 
B
converges to the Black-Scholes price for b = 0. But perhaps surprisingly, replication based on the 
Black-Scholes delta will also exactly replicate option payoffs in the presence of a barrier b > 0, albeit 
at unnecessarily high cost. For a discussion of this point, please see Appendix B (Supplementary 
Material). 
Another way of seeing that a put should be priced by direct replication is to note that a put is a 
bounded claim with a maximum payoff of K – b, and then consider the following extreme cases: 
(i)  Barrier equal to strike 
For K = b, the put payoff becomes zero. In Figure 7, the strike is 1, and the direct replication 
price P (blue line) goes to zero for b = 1, which is intuitively sensible. In contrast, the 
B 
synthetic replication price SP (dashed black line) and Black-Scholes price (dashed red line) 
B 
remain well above zero for b = 1. 
(ii)  High volatility 
For high volatility (e.g. σ > 0.290 in Figure 7), the synthetic replication price SP can exceed 
B 
the maximum possible put payoff K – b. But this gives an immediate arbitrage, with no credit 
requirements: write the put for a cash credit of SP , which is larger than the maximum 
B
possible payoff you need to make. In contrast, the direct replication price P is well-behaved 
B 
for high volatility: it increases modestly towards a limit, but remains less than the Black-
Scholes price. 
 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

20  R. Guy Thomas 
 
Figure 8. Call option: synthetic replication is cheaper than direct replication.
5.  Illustration for a Call Option 
5.1. With no margin requirements: synthetic replication is preferred 
Figure 8 illustrates the comparative costs of direct replication C and synthetic replication SC for a 
B  B 
call option with the same parameters as in section 4, for a range of barrier levels. 
We can make the following observations on Figure 8. 
For a call, if we assume m = 0 (i.e. no margin payments are required on interim losses of 
replication),  synthetic  replication  always  has  a  lower  initial  cost  than  direct  replication.  To 
understand this, note that the deltas of the replication strategies when the spot price touches the 
barrier at an interim time t are: 
synthetic replication:  t) 
direct replication: δ = 0 
CB 
So the synthetic replication strategy is always better positioned at the barrier (long the asset, 
which is subject to positive interventions). 
It may seem counter-intuitive to say that in a world with a higher barrier, a call can be replicated 
at lower cost (as a fraction of the initial spot 
16 
price) . To understand this, look at Figure 9. This shows four possible paths for the notional price N
t 
and the corresponding observed price S (in the upper left panel, there are no barrier touches, so the 
t 
two paths never diverge). In each panel, the effect of the intervention on the terminal price is S − 
T 
N , and the effect on the call payoff is: 
T
(i)  upper left panel: no increase (because no barrier touches, so no interventions) 
(ii)  upper right panel: increase of S − N ; 
T  T
(iii)  lower left panel: increase of less than S − N ; 
T  T
(iv)  lower right panel: no increase (because terminal observed price below strike). 
We can then see that the reduction in call replication cost, compared to a world with no barrier, 
arises from paths of type (iii). For these paths, the synthetic replication strategy SC fully captures 
B 
the  effect  of  the  interventions,  but  the  call  payoff  is  increased  by  less  than  the  effect  of  the 
interventions. As foreshadowed graphically in section 3.1, a call is an “inefficient” contract in the 
presence of the barrier. 
We can usefully consider the same extreme cases for the call as we did for the put: 
16Note that Figure 9 does not say a call is cheaper in a numeraire of £ in a world with a higher barrier. Value on the y-
axis is expressed as a fraction of the initial spot price, which is likely to be higher in a world with a higher barrier. 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  21 
 
 
Figure 9. Call payoff, max(ST −K, 0), may be less than accumulated effect of the interventions.
(i)  Barrier equal to strike 
For K = b, the call is economically equivalent to a forward contract. The synthetic replication 
price SC then sensibly prices the call as a forward contract, (i.e. P = 0, so SC = SF ); but the 
B  B  B  B
direct replication price C gives an unnecessarily higher price. 
B 
(ii)  High volatility 
For high volatility (e.g. σ > 0.409 in Figure 8), the direct replication price C exceeds the 
B 
spot price. This gives an immediate arbitrage, with no credit requirement: write the call and 
buy the stock for a cash credit C − S, and then at maturity either deliver the stock and receive 
B 
the strike (if the call is exercised), or keep the original cash credit (if the call is not exercised). 
On the other hand, the synthetic replication price SC sensibly remains less than the spot price 
B 
for all volatilities. 
5.2. With margin requirements: call price is ambiguous 
The synthetic replication strategy SC is subject to the caveat discussed in section 3, i.e. the interim 
B 
losses can exceed the initial saving C − SC plus interest to the interim date. This is more likely when 
B  B 
the barrier is low, towards the left of Figure 8: the initial saving (i.e. the gap between the black and 
blue curves) is small, and the largest possible interim loss is large. To illustrate, let V  be the 
t
value of the synthetic replicating portfolio for a call at interim time t, and define the “Interim Loss 
Ratio” (ILR) of the strategy as 
ILR(29) 
T 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

22  R. Guy Thomas 
where ILR < −1 indicates that the negative value of the strategy exceeds the rolled-up initial saving 
at some point during the term. Then on the assumptions at the start of section 2.3 (in particular, S = 
K = 1), for b = 0.7, the 25% conditional tail expectation of the ILR is −0.76 (and none of 10,000 
simulations gives ILR < −1). So for b ≥ 0.7, strategy SC might be preferred: the maximum possible 
B 
interim loss is smaller than the rolled-up difference in initial costs. But for b = 0.6, 0.5, 0.4, the 
corresponding 25% tail expectations of the ILR are −1.53, −2.98, −5.20. For these cases, the strategy 
C might be preferred: it has a slightly higher initial cost, but avoids a substantial chance of interim 
B 
losses of several times the extra cost. 
To summarise this section: ignoring margin requirements, the initial cost of synthetic replication 
SC is always cheaper than that of direct replication C . But the strategy SC may have negative value 
B  B B 
at interim dates, and these losses can be much larger than the difference in initial costs plus interest 
to the interim date. If margin payments need to be made to cover interim losses, the price of a call 
seems ambiguous. 
6.  Arbitrage and Limits to Arbitrage 
The dual replicating strategies for puts, calls and forwards as discussed above point to the possibility 
for arbitrage strategies in the barrier model. This section examines these possibilities directly, and 
their practicality in the context of credit constraints. 
6.1. Buying when the spot price touches the barrier (not feasible) 
Theoretically, if we could buy at the instant when S touches the barrier, and sell immediately after 
t 
reflection, this would be an immediate arbitrage, with no risk of interim losses. However, we have 
already noted in section 2.1 that this is not practically feasible: the spot price spends no finite time 
at the barrier, so no-one can implement the strategy. From a mathematical viewpoint, the existence 
of this strategy has consequences: it rules out the existence of an equivalent martingale measure for 
the asset price. But from an economic viewpoint, a purely theoretical arbitrage opportunity seems of 
no consequence: if no-one can implement the arbitrage, it cannot affect the 
assumed 
17 
price process . 
Although buying exactly when S touches the barrier is not feasible, it may be possible to obtain 
t 
some sort of approximation. Intuitively, we can do this by increasing a long position as S approaches 
t 
the barrier, and then reducing the position as S moves away from the barrier. This type of strategy 
t 
will be exposed to interim losses, because S can fall further after we initiate the position, but the 
t 
presence of the barrier will place a limit on the losses. All the strategies discussed below amount to 
some form of this approximation. 
6.2. Net-delta strategy (arbitrage with interim losses) 
In Figure 6, the pairs of replicating paths for forward, put and call all have the same initial difference, 
F − SF (which is independent of the strike K), and the differences shrink at the same rate in each 
B  B 
panel  as  the  replicating  paths  converge on  the  contract payoff.  This  is because  the  duality  of 
replicating paths in each panel has the same underlying cause: the forward contract payoff can be 
replicated either in a cheaper way which exploits the interventions (SF ), or in a dearer way which 
B
does not (F ). It follows that if we run the cheaper strategy long and the dearer strategy short, we 
B
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  23 
should be able extract the initial difference in prices F − SF (also equal to C − SC and SP − P ) 
B  B  B  B  B  B
plus interest over the term. Because the two strikes are equal and opposite, they do not need to be 
replicated; we can just do the delta trading on each side, funded wholly by borrowing. That is, 
starting from zero wealth, we borrow to fund a continuously varying “net-delta” 
17We could formalise the impracticality by requiring a minimum time interval h between trades. This reflects the 
practical reality of discrete hedging, and rules out most of the putative purchases exactly at the barrier. It also technically 
rules out continuous replication strategies; but for small h, discrete hedging makes a negligible difference to the accuracy of 
replication. 
position , specified by differentiating minus Equation (27) with respect to the asset price: 
      (30) 
which is always a long position, and gives the same terminal payoff whether or not the barrier is 
touched. The terminal payoff is a constant representing the  Q -expectation of the effect of the 
N
interventions on the terminal asset price (i.e. the effect anticipated in our proposed option prices). 
The strategy reaches its maximum long position when the asset is at the barrier: it buys at an 
increasing rate as the asset approaches the barrier and sells at a decreasing rate as it rebounds, and 
so approximates a purchase exactly at the barrier. 
The  viability  of  this  strategy  is  investigated  in  Appendix  C  (Supplementary  Material).  In 
summary: 
(i)  The  strategy  is  difficult  to  scale  if  initiated  when  the  spot  price  is  well  above  the 
barrier,because the potential interim losses are very large relative to the terminal gain, 
especially when the strategy is run over shorter terms. 
(ii)  It becomes more scalable if initiated when the spot price is already close to the barrier. Thisis 
intuitive: the closer to the barrier a long position is initiated, the less it can lose. 
(iii)  To the extent that the strategy is implemented near the barrier, this may disrupt theassumed 
price process near the barrier. But this has little effect on the replication of a put, because 
δ → 0 as S → b, so that the put replicating portfolio P has almost no exposure to the asset 
PB  B 
price near the barrier. 
(iv)  Point (iii) also addresses the more general criticism that even market participants who donot 
pursue explicit arbitrage strategies may tend to buy as the spot price approaches the barrier, 
thus modifying the price process in this region. Yes, this may be so; but because the put 
replication portfolio has  almost  no  exposure  to  the  asset  in  this  region,  it  makes  little 
difference to the replication of a put. 
6.3. Call paradoxes 
The synthetic replication strategy for a call captures the full benefit of the interventions at the barrier 
along all possible paths for the asset, irrespective of the option strike. For a high strike, the Q -
N
expectation of the call payoff tends to zero. It follows that the payoff can be funded starting from 
wealth of minus the discounted Q -expectation of the interventions. Stated differently, for a high 
N
strike, the synthetic replication strategy SC tends to the net-delta arbitrage strategy in Equation (30), 
B 
so we can start with wealth of minus the certain gain this will make. 
However, the putative “negative price” just suggested assumes that the call writer replicates by 
the synthetic replication strategy SC . This involves interim losses, which for a high strike can be a 
B
large multiple of the negative initial cost (particularly if the initial spot price is well above the barrier, 
as noted at 6.2(i) above). In contrast, the direct replication strategy C avoids any possibility of 
B 
interim losses, and as we increase the strike, its initial cost tends to zero from above. As previously 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

24  R. Guy Thomas 
noted, the choice between the two strategies (and hence the price of a call) seems ambiguous. It may 
be reasonable to assume that in practice (a) any offered prices for calls will be strictly positive, but 
(b) there may be few buyers of calls with high strikes, because the payoff can potentially be 
replicated more cheaply (albeit with interim losses). In other words, calls with high strikes are likely 
to be illiquid. 
The negative initial cost of replication (ignoring interim losses) for high strikes can also be 
understood graphically by looking at Figure 9. We have already noted that for paths of the lower left 
type, the call payoff is less than the quantum of the accumulated interventions, S − N . Now think 
T  T
about what happens as the strike rises. The density of the types of paths shown in the top two panels 
falls: because the strike is high, very few of the underlying GBM paths for the notional price N
t 
terminate above the strike. All the call payoff then arises from paths of the advantageous 
18 
lower left type, where the payoff is more than fully funded by the free interventions . 
( )
The “high” strike postulated above is, more precisely, high relative to the forward price of Se r −q T. 
It follows that a negative call replication cost can also arise for q > r, or S sufficiently close to b. 
These effects can be understood as follows. 
For q > r, a debt-funded long position initiated sufficiently close to the barrier is an arbitrage: the 
barrier ensures that maximum possible capital loss at maturity is less than the accumulation of the 
carry q – r. Interim losses can occur, because the spot price can move closer to the barrier before 
much carry has accumulated, but the barrier limits the size of these losses. 
For S → b, in terms of Figure 9, if S is already close to the barrier, there will be a high density of 
t 
future asset paths that receive a significant contribution from interventions at the barrier. Most asset 
price paths that produce positive call payoffs will then be of the advantageous lower left type. 
There is a possible economic interpretation of the negative call price. For a sufficiently strong 
combination of q > r and S → b, a long position in the asset funded wholly by debt can be entered at 
zero cost and gives a certain gain (provided that the margin requirement can be financed). A call 
option may then be a less attractive proposition than the zero-cost long position (especially for higher 
strikes, which make a positive call payoff less likely). 
Any potential exploitation of the paradoxes highlighted in this section implies disruption of the 
assumed asset price process near the barrier. But as we have already noted in section 6.2(iv), the put 
replicating portfolio has almost no exposure to the asset in this region, so the exploitation should 
make little difference to the replication of a put. 
6.4. Bounds on option prices 
The modified form of put-call parity suggested in Equation (28): 
  SCB − PB = SFB  (31) 
Synthetic call price – Direct put price = Sub-martingale forward price 
invalidates the standard lower bound: Put  rT − Se . This bound is often described 
as “model-free,” but it depends on the standard put-call parity, and is not implied by the modified 
parity above. To see the invalidity of the standard lower bound, consider a put with a strike equal to 
the barrier, K = b. This put can never have any payoff, and so is sensibly valued at zero, as given by 
our formula P ; but if S is close to the barrier with K = b and r < q, the standard lower bound will be 
B
well above zero. 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  25 
For a call, the standard lower bound is Call qT − Ke . The first limit remains valid 
in the presence of the barrier: SC B ≥ Se−qT − Ke−rT, i.e. a call has optionality, so it is worth at least as 
much as a forward with the same strike. The second limit of zero is reasonable for offered prices of 
calls, albeit these will probably be illiquid, as discussed in section 6.3 above. 
The inapplicability of the standard lower bound for a put also implies a modification to the 
standard upper bound for the valuation of an equity release mortgage, as in the “Principle II” 
promulgated by the Prudential Regulation Authority (2020) in the United Kingdom. This is covered 
in Appendix D (Supplementary Material). 
18Once again (cf. footnote 15), there is a loose analogy with the scenario of a bubble in the underlying asset. In a bubble, 
the paradox is that as we increase the strike, the initial cost of replicating a call tends to a positive limit (cf. zero for 
BlackScholes), and the standard put-call parity fails (Heston et al., 2007, p. 381; Cox & Hobson, 2005, p. 478). In a bubble, 
the current spot price exceeds the discounted expectation (under the pricing measure) of the asset’s price at future date, i.e. 
( )
S 0 > e r −q TE Q [S T]; with a lower reflecting barrier, this inequality is reversed, so the sign of the limit for the call price is also 
reversed. 
7.  Discussion 
7.1. Mathematical versus economic perspectives on arbitrage 
When considering the consequences of the various arbitrage possibilities in highlighted in section 6, 
it is useful to distinguish between mathematical and economic perspectives. 
From a mathematical perspective, the feasibility of any form of arbitrage, even if incapable of 
practical  implementation, negates  the  “No  Free  Lunch With  Vanishing  Risk”  condition  in  the 
fundamental theorem of asset pricing (Delbaen & Schachermayer, 1994). It follows by the theorem 
that no equivalent martingale measure for the observed asset price S exists; this negates the usual 
t 
justification for using the computational technique of risk-neutral pricing. But in the barrier model, 
there is a different justification: we can apply risk-neutral arguments at the level of the notional price 
N (not the observed price S), but then nevertheless hedge using S, as explained in section 2.4. 
t  t t
From an economic perspective, the feasibility of arbitrage suggests that the assumed price process 
for S might not be realistic, insofar as the actions of arbitrageurs may tend to eliminate the features 
t 
which arbitrage exploits. But the importance of this economic concern depends on the extent to 
which the arbitrage can be scaled, and whether this eliminates the regularity which it exploits. On 
this, the following points can be made. 
(1)  The arbitrage represents a disequilibrium in the barrier model. But it is a disequilibrium 
funded  by  the  government,  and  therefore,  by  assumption,  a  sustainable  one.  This 
sustainability derives from the government’s unlimited powers of intervention, as detailed in 
the next point. 
(2)  Whilst the existence of an explicit barrier would imply arbitrage opportunities as identified 
in section 6, the barrier is in reality not an explicit feature. Instead, it is a metaphor for the 
full range of possible policy responses to a large fall in house prices: changes in general 
monetary and fiscal policies, relaxation of prudential limits on mortgage lending, interest-
free  and/or  non-recourse  State  loans  to  house  purchasers,  regulatory  changes  which 
incentivise or compel institutional investors to buy houses, printing money to buy houses, 
etc. The metaphorical nature of the barrier precludes arbitrage in practice. 
(3)  The arbitrage opportunities all involve interim losses (except for the impractical one of 
buying when the spot price is exactly at the barrier). Appendix C (Supplementary Material) 
shows that the credit requirements are generally substantial relative to the gains, and so the 
ability to scale the arbitrages will be limited by credit constraints. The credit requirements 
can be reduced by initiating the strategy only when the spot price is already very close to the 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

26  R. Guy Thomas 
barrier (essentially mimicking a purchase exactly at the barrier). But disruption to the price 
process in this region makes almost no difference to the replication of a put, because the put 
delta near the barrier is very close to zero. 
(4)  A number of authors have put forward models where credit constraints, margin requirements 
and other institutional features lead to the persistence of some arbitrage opportunities in 
equilibrium,  e.g.  Shleifer  &  Vishny  (1997),  Loewenstein  &  Willard  (2000),  Basak  & 
Croitoru (2000), Liu & Longstaff (2004). Others have documented empirical evidence of 
persistent arbitrages in various markets, e.g. Gemmill & Thomas (1997), Lamont & Thaler 
(2003), Mitchell et al. (2007), Mitchell & Pulvino (2012). 
(5)  Experience with currency barriers suggests that when the spot price approaches a lower 
barrier, there is often increased selling (not buying, as the logic of arbitrage would suggest), 
presumably predicated on speculation that the authorities may not continue to support the 
barrier. For example, Hertrich & Zimmerman (2017) find that currency option prices shortly 
before the Swiss National Bank abandoned its lower barrier for the Euro/Swiss Franc rate in 
January 2015 were consistent with the put formula assuming a “true” barrier significantly 
below the official policy barrier. To the extent that such speculative selling occurs, it may 
offset any buying predicated on the logic of arbitrage. 
7.2. Alternatives to the barrier model 
The complications identified in this paper make the barrier model seem more conditional on practical 
limits to arbitrage than was apparent in previous papers (Veestraeten, 2008, 2013; Hertrich, 2015; 
Hertrich  &  Zimmermann,  2017;  Thomas,  2021).  However,  I  suggest  that  its  usefulness  in 
applications such as NNEG valuation should be judged by comparison with available alternatives, 
not an abstract standard of perfection that no extant model attains. If one believes that the barrier 
assumption, or something like it, is a closer approximation of reality for house prices over the long 
term than an unrestricted geometric Brownian motion (for reasons, see Thomas, 2021, sections 2 
and 3), there do not seem to be any wholly satisfactory approaches. Three possible alternatives are 
as follows. 
(i)  Standard Black-Scholes, as prescribed by the Prudential Regulatory Authority (2020) for 
NNEG  valuation  for  certain  regulatory  purposes.  This  simply  ignores  the  reality  that 
interventions are likely after large falls in prices, and produces what one well-known writer 
of  long-dated puts  has  called  “wildly  inappropriate  values  when  applied  to  long-dated 
options” (Buffett, 2011). In the context of NNEG, Black-Scholes seems to me a shortterm 
model stretched well beyond its sensible range of application, like trying to use an egg-timer 
as a calendar. 
(ii)  The “real-world” method typically used by UK insurers for NNEG valuation (Hosty et al., 
2008). This makes an ad hoc adjustment to the Black-Scholes formula, replacing the forward 
( )
house price Se r −q Twith a projected house price Seg T, where g > r – q. This gives much lower 
put values than Black-Scholes. If calls are also valued by this method, then to be consistent 
with parity, the forward price must be Seg T (this can be seen by reworking Equation (21) 
with r – q replaced by g, and is also discussed in Taleb, 2015). The realworld method 
therefore implicitly assumes the persistence of a large static arbitrage (i.e. parity-implied 
( )
forward price Seg T less no-arbitrage forward price Se r −q T). This might be considered a more 
disconcerting assumption than the persistence of some limited dynamic arbitrage in the 
barrier model. 
To illustrate, in the representative example detailed in section 2.3 (in particular S = K = 1, b 
= 0.5), the value at inception of the arbitrage in the barrier model is 0.0416; this can be 
extracted only by a dynamic strategy that may incur substantial interim losses. But in the 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  27 
real-world model with a typical house price growth g = 2.5% and all other parameters the 
same, the value at inception of the arbitrage is 0.5052 (i.e. 12x larger); this can be extracted 
by a static strategy with no interim losses. 
(iii)  The benchmark approach originated by Eckhard Platen (e.g. Platen, 2002; Buhlmann & 
Platen, 2003; Platen & Heath, 2010; Fergusson & Platen, 2022). This involves a change of 
numeraire to the “benchmark portfolio” which maximises expected log-utility of terminal 
wealth (in other literature, the “growth optimal portfolio”). The price of an option is then 
defined as its real-world conditional expectation in the benchmark numeraire; for long terms, 
the price is significantly less than Black-Scholes. Effectively, the benchmark approach 
anticipates the asset’s risk premium in general, rather than the prospect of intervention after 
a large fall in prices. There is no equivalent martingale measure, so some arbitrage is 
possible, but only with interim losses. There are some apparent paradoxes, but different ones 
from the barrier model: the price of a put approaches zero when the benchmark portfolio is 
low, and a modified form of put-call parity applies. 
Notably, all of the barrier, real-world and benchmark models allow some form of arbitrage. This 
perhaps reflects an implicit view that the persistence of some arbitrage opportunities may be a 
reasonable feature of a long-term asset model, if the ability to scale them in practice is curtailed by 
credit limits, transaction costs, and other institutional constraints. 
8.  Conclusions 
Putting sections 2–7 together, we can state the following conclusions. 
(1)  The observed price process S (a reflected geometric Brownian motion) in the barrier model 
t 
is not arbitrage-free. Arbitrage with interim losses is possible (or with no losses if one could 
buy exactly at the barrier, but this can never be implemented in practice). 
(2)  The  arbitrage  possibilities  represent  a  disequilibrium  in  the  barrier  model.  But  it  is  a 
disequilibrium funded by the government, and therefore (by assumption) a sustainable one, 
based on the government’s unlimited powers of intervention. 
(3)  The possibility of arbitrage, whether or not it is implemented, implies (by the Fundamental 
Theorem of Asset Pricing) that there is no change of measure that will make the observed 
price S a martingale. So the usual justification for risk-neutral option valuation does not 
t 
apply to options on S. 
t
(4)  Nevertheless,  options  on  S can  be  expressed  as  compound  options  on  the  underlying 
t 
arbitrage-free notional price N (a geometric Brownian motion), to which change of measure 
t 
and other standard risk-neutral arguments can be applied. Although N is not available for 
t 
hedging, the required hedging schemes for the compound option have deltas which go to 
zero whenever  N attains a new minimum below the barrier (equivalently: whenever  S
t  t 
touches the barrier). Then because, everywhere above the barrier, S is just a piecewise-scaled 
t 
version of N, hedging with S and a piecewise-scaled delta gives the same results as hedging 
t t 
with N. 
t
(5)  The price of a put is clear: direct replication has a lower initial cost than synthetic replication, 
and the replication portfolio always has positive value, so no extra funding is required for 
interim losses. This affirms the relevance of the cheaper direct replication price P (rather 
B 
than the dearer synthetic replication price SP ) for NNEG valuation. 
B
(6)  The price of a call is ambiguous: synthetic replication has a lower initial cost than direct 
replication, but the replication portfolio may give interim losses. So the preferred replication 
strategy, and hence price, of a call depends on what margin payments need to be made on 
these losses. 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

28  R. Guy Thomas 
(7)  It follows from points (4) to (6) that put-call parity is also in general ambiguous. However, 
if no margin payments are required on interim losses, we can think of parity as SC − P = 
B  B 
SF , that is Synthetic call price – Direct put price = Sub-martingale forward price. 
B
(8)  Potential arbitrage strategies in the barrier model are all predicated on borrowing to increase 
a long position as S approaches the barrier and then reducing the position as S moves away 
t  t 
from the barrier. The practicality of scaling this strategy depends on credit limits and margin 
requirements. To the extent that arbitrage is implemented (and funded by the government), 
the  assumed  price  process  of  reflected  geometric  Brownian  motion  may  be  disrupted, 
particularly near the barrier. 
(9)  The delta of the direct replication P for a put tends to zero as the asset price approaches the 
B 
barrier. This makes the strategy more robust to the possible disruption of the assumed price 
process near the barrier (as mentioned in the previous point). 
Computer code. Code in the R programming language demonstrating Monte Carlo evaluation of the options and the 
associated replication schemes is available at https://github.com/guythomas7. 
Acknowledgements. I wish to thank (without implicating) Markus Hertrich, Alan Reed, and Pradip Tapadar for comments 
on earlier drafts, and Dean Buckner and Kevin Dowd for useful criticisms of earlier papers. 
Supplementary materials.  For  supplementary  material  for  this  article,  please
 visit  https://doi.org/10.1017/ S1748499522000227 
References 
Basak, S. & Croitoru, B. (2000). Equilibrium mispricing in a capital market with portfolio constraints. The Review of 
Financial Studies, 13, 715–748. 
Buckner, D., Dowd, K. & Hulley, H. (2022). Arbitrage problems with reflected geometric Brownian motion. Available at 
SSRN: https://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.4008718. 
Buffett, W.E. (2011). Letter to shareholders 2010. www.berkshirehathaway.com [accessed 26-March-2022]. 
Buhlmann, H. & Platen, E. (2003). A discrete time benchmark approach for insurance and finance. ASTIN Bulletin, 33, 
153–172. 
Cox, A.M.G. & Hobson, D.G. (2005). Local martingales, bubbles and option prices. Finance and Stochastics, 9, 477–292. 
Delbaen, F. & Schachermayer, W. (1994). A general version of the fundamental theorem of asset pricing. Mathematische 
Annalen, 300, 463–520. 
Fergusson, K. & Platen, E. (forthcoming). Less-expensive long-term annuities linked to mortality, cash and equity. Annals 
of Actuarial Science, doi: 10.1017/S1748499522000112. 
Gemmill, G. & Thomas, D.C. (1997). Warrants on the London Stock Exchange: pricing biases and investor confusion. 
European Finance Review, 1, 31–49. 
Gerber, H.U. & Pafumi, G. (2000). Pricing dynamic investment fund protection. North American Actuarial Journal, 4(2), 
28–37. 
Goldman, M.B., Sosin, H.S. & Gatto, M.A. (1979). Path dependent options: buy at the low, sell at the high. Journal of 
Finance, 34, 1111–1127. 
Hertrich, M. & Veestraeten, D. (2013). Valuing stock options when prices are subject to a lower boundary: a correction. 
Journal of Futures Markets, 33, 889–890. 
Hertrich, M. (2015). A cautionary note on the put-call parity under an asset pricing model with a lower reflecting barrier. 
Swiss Journal of Economics and Statistics, 151, 227–260. 
Hertrich, M. & Zimmermann, H. (2014). On the credibility of the Euro/Swiss Franc floor: a financial market perspective 
Available at SSRN: http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.22909997. 
Hertrich, M. & Zimmermann, H. (2017). On the credibility of the Euro/Swiss Franc floor: a financial market perspective. 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 49, 567–578. 
Heston, S.L., Loewenstein, M. & Willard, G.A. (2007). Options and bubbles. Review of Financial Studies, 20, 359–390. 
Hosty, G.M., Groves, S.J., Murray, C.A. & Shah, M. (2008). Pricing and risk capital in the equity release market. British 
Actuarial Journal, 14, 41–109. 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

  Annals of Actuarial Science  29 
Imai, J. & Boyle, P.P. (2001). Dynamic fund protection. North American Actuarial Journal, 5(2), 31–49. 
Jarrow, R.A., Protter, P. & Shimbo, K. (2007). Asset price bubbles in complete markets. In M.C. Fu, R.A. Jarrow, J.J. Yen 
& R.J. Elliott (Eds.), Advances in Mathematical Finance (pp. 97–122). Birkhauser Press, Boston. 
Kenny, T., Golding, C., Craske, G., Dobinson, A. Gunter, S., Griffiths, O., Hayes, N., Mockridge, A., Robertson, S., 
Saundh, R. & Thorpe. J. Actuarial management of equity release mortgages. www.actuaries.org.uk [accessed 7-June-
2022]. 
Ko,  B.,  Shiu,  E.S.W.  &  Wei,  L.  (2010).  Pricing  maturity  guarantee  with  dynamic  withdrawal  benefit.  Insurance: 
Mathematics and Economics, 47, 216–223. 
Lamont, O.A. & Thaler, R.H. (2003). Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carve-outs. Journal of 
Political Economy, 111, 227–268. 
Liu, J. & Longstaff, F.A. (2004). Losing money on arbitrage: optimal dynamic portfolio choice in markets with arbitrage 
opportunities. Review of Financial Studies, 17(3), 611–641. 
Loewenstein, M. & Willard, G.A. (2000). Local martingales, arbitrage and viability: free snacks and cheap thrills. Economic 
Theory, 16, 135–161. 
Mitchell, M., Pedersen, L. & Pulvino, T. (2007). Slow moving capital. American Economic Review Papers and 
Proceedings, 97, 215–220. 
Mitchell, M. & Pulvino, T. (2012). Arbitrage crashes and the speed of capital. Journal of Financial Economics, 104, 469–
490. 
Platen, E. (2002). Arbitrage in continuous complete markets. Advances in Applied Probability, 34, 540–558. 
Platen, E. & Heath, D. (2010). A Benchmark Approach to Quantitative Finance. Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
Protter, P. (2013). A mathematical theory of bubbles. In V. Henderson & R. Sircar (Eds.), Paris-Princeton Lectures on 
Mathematical Finance (pp. 1–108). Springer International, Geneva. 
Prudential Regulation Authority  (2020). Supervisory Statement 3/17 (April 2020 version).  www.bankofengland.co. 
uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2017/solvency-2-matching-adjustment-illiquid-unrated-assets-and-equity-
releasemortgages-ss [accessed 7-June-2022]. 
Shleifer, A. & Vishny, R.W. (1997). The limits of arbitrage. Journal of Finance, 52(1), 35–55. 
Taleb, N.N. (2015). Unique option pricing measure with neither dynamic hedging nor complete markets. European Financial 
Management, 21, 228–235. 
Thomas, R.G. (2021). Valuation of no-negative-equity guarantees with a lower reflecting barrier. Annals of Actuarial Science, 
15, 115–143. 
Veestraeten, D. (2008). Valuing stock options when prices are subject to a lower boundary. Journal of Futures Markets, 28, 
231–247. 
Veestraeten, D. (2013). Currency option pricing in a credible exchange rate target zone. Applied Financial Economics, 23, 
951–962. 
Wiersema, U.F. (2008). Brownian Motion Calculus. John Wiley & Sons Ltd, Chichester. 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press

30  R. Guy Thomas 
 
Cite this article: Thomas RG (2023). Long-term option pricing with a lower reflecting barrier, Annals of Actuarial Science, 
1–27. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 
 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1748499522000227 Published online by Cambridge University Press