ELECTRIC POLARIZABILITY OF PLANAR ARRAYS 1
Evaluation of the Electric Polarizability for Planar
Frequency Selective Arrays
Andrei Ludvig-Osipov*, and B.L.G. Jonsson,
Abstract—This paper presents a method to evaluate the static II. PROBLEM DESCRIPTION
8102 raM 32  ]hp-ppa.scisyhp[  2v73401.1171:viXra
electric polarizability of two-dimensional infinitely periodic metal
The goal of this paper is to develop an efficient method
patch arrays with dielectric substrate. Static polarizabilities
to determine the electric polarizability for a planar two-
are used in several design applications for periodic structures
such as estimation of the bandwidth limitations for frequency- dimensional array. We consider a negligibly thin layer of PEC
selective structures or prediction of the radiation properties for patches, placed parallel to the xy-plane with a rectangular unit
antenna arrays. The main features of the proposed method are
cell of size P ×P and a dielectric substrate thickness d, see
x y
its numerical efficiency and a deep insight into the physics of
Fig. 1a. The shape of the PEC patch can be arbitrary as long
the fields interacting with the structure. We provide derivation
as the patches in any two cells are not connected (i.e., the
and analysis of the method, and its verification against two an-
other commercial solver-based approaches for various structure structure is low-pass).
geometries. Additionally, we suggest the guidelines for applying The electric polarizability of a structure is a dyadic tensor
the method to bandwidth optimization of frequency selective
γ, which characterizes the ability of the structure to separate
structures and illustrate this with an example.
electrical charges. Consider the external uniform electrostatic
Index Terms—Polarizability, frequency selective surfaces, scat- field E , applied to the structure. The polarizability relates
0
tering, periodic structures, sum rules.
this field to the induced electric dipole moment p in a unit
cell of the structure [11]
I. INTRODUCTION p = (cid:15) γE . (1)
0 0
Planar frequency selective structures appear in a number
Given the full electrostatic field E in this configuration (can
of electromagnetic devices, such as filters [1], absorbers [2],
be obtained by solving the electrostatic problem), we find the
polarizers [3], beam splitters and reflection/transmission ar- dipole moment p per unit cell U as
rays [4]. They are widely used in antennas as components
(cid:90) (cid:73)
of reflectors, radomes and as antenna arrays themselves [5]. p = ((cid:15) − (cid:15) )EdV + xnˆ · ((cid:15)E)dS. (2)
0
High impedance surfaces and several metamaterials are im- U ∂Ω
plemented as periodic structures [6]. Furthermore, the phe- Here ∂Ω is the surface of the PEC subregion Ω within U , (cid:15) is
nomenon of extraordinary transmission through periodic struc- a dielectric permittivity tensor. For example, consider Fig. 1a,
tures has attracted a renewed scientific interest [7]. The fun- where the subregion Ω is a PEC cross, and the substrate is
damental principles of frequency selective surfaces are related dielectric. To evaluate a component of the electric polarizabil-
to optical diffraction gratings, discovered in the late 18th ity tensor γ , u,v ∈ {x,y,z}, a u-component of the dipole
uv
century [8]. Since then, frequency selective surfaces for optical moment p due to E in v-direction should be considered.
u 0
and radio-frequency spectra has been thoroughly studied and Note that for the here considered structures γ ,γ ,γ ,γ
xz yz zx zy
described in the literature, see e.g. [2], [4]. are negligible and γ is equal to polarizability of the substrate
zz
Limitations of the bandwidth for periodic structures has only. Thus, we focus on evaluation of γ , u,v ∈ {x,y}.
uv
begun to be investigated [7], [9], [10] in terms of sum rules. We consider here only the xx-component of the polarizability
The bounds connect dynamic behavior of the structure to tensor. The other components are obtained in a similar manner,
its static electric and magnetic polarizabilities. To efficiently as discussed further in this paper. In the rest of the paper we
and accurately determine polarizabilities is thus essential in discuss the normalized quantity γ /A, where A = P × P .
xx x y
establishing the bounds [11], [12]. There are existing polarizability estimation methods found
In this paper we propose a computationally effective method in literature. The method of moments-based approach [13]
to estimate the electric polarizability of a frequency selective solves the first-order integral equation for potentials on ∂Ω
structure consisting of an array of patches. The distinct prop- with respect to the surface charge nˆ · ((cid:15)E), which allows to
erties of the proposed method are its numerical efficiency and evaluate (2). Variational approach [11] provides a lower and
analyticity, providing insight in the physics of the frequency an upper bounds on the electric polarizability as functionals of
selective stuctures. This is beneficial for optimization of such magnetic vector F and electric scalar φ potentials respectively
structures. for a given geometry with an applied uniform electric field.
Low-frequency asymptote approach estimates the polarizabil-
A. Ludvig-Osipov and B.L.G. Jonsson are with the School of Electrical ity from a known reflection coefficient R of an x-polarized
xx
Engineering and Computer Science, KTH Royal Institute of Technology,
normally impinging wave at low frequency according to the
SE10044 Stockholm, Sweden e-mail: osipov@kth.se.
expansion R = −jkγ /2A + O(k2) as k → 0, which
xx xx

ELECTRIC POLARIZABILITY OF PLANAR ARRAYS 2
(L/R),Π
P Y mn are the total modal admittances, where the upper
x
(a) (a)
d index stands for the media on the left (L) or the right (R) of the
(cid:15)
PEC structure and the mode’s polarization Π (TM or TE). The
(cid:80)(cid:48) (cid:80)∞
sum denotes with the term (m,n) = (0,0)
(m,n)=−∞
excluded. The equivalent network yields that the reflection
coefficient of the fundamental mode is
P
y
ˆ (L),Π (R),Π
k Y (k) − Y (k) − Y
R (k) = 00 00 eq . (6)
xx
(L),Π (R),Π
Y (k) + Y (k) + Y
y z 00 00 eq
A validation and further details of MNA can be found
x
in [15], [16]. It is computationally effective and provides a
(b)
deep insight in the physics of the problem. However, a current
(L),TE (R),TE
Y Y Y profile J(x,y) is known in analytical form only for a few
00 eq 00
patch shapes, e.g., a rectangle [15] and a ring[17]. For other
shapes, obtaining a current profile J(x,y) and its Fourier
Fig. 1: (a) A periodic array of patches on a dielectric substrate transform requires additional treatment. It was reported in [16]
of thickness d and permittivity (cid:15); the unit cell size is P ×P , that J(x,y) can be extracted from a full-wave simulation on
x y
ˆ
k is a wavevector of an impinging field. (b) An equivalent a single frequency point.
scheme for an impinging mode. We note here that for computing γ one should consider
uv
an impinging wave with polarization in v-direction, and the
corresponding R .
uv
is valid for a non-magnetic low pass periodic structures, not
supporting electric currents in the longitudinal direction [10].
IV. PROPOSED METHOD
Here, k is the wavenumber in vacuum.
To introduce the proposed method, we start with a treatment
of a non-dielectric case (equivalently, d = 0). The dielectric
III. MULTIMODAL NETWORK APPROACH
layer is introduced at the end. To use (3) we need to define the
The here proposed method to determine electric polariz-
modal admittances. For a material with a relative permittivity
ability is given in Sec. IV. It is based on the low-frequency (cid:113)
(cid:15) they are Y TM (k) = (cid:15)k/(η (cid:15)k2 − k2 − k2 ) for TM
asymptote approach and on the Multimodal Network Ap- mn,(cid:15) 0 xn ym
(cid:113)
proach (MNA) [15]. In this section we shortly review MNA, as harmonics and Y TE (k) = (cid:15)k2 − k2 − k2 /(kη ) for TE,
mn,(cid:15) xn ym 0
it will be beneficial for understanding of the proposed method. where η stands for the free space wave impedance. In the
0
MNA was developed for a frequency analysis of a plane non-substrate case we have free space ((cid:15) = 1) at the both
wave scattering against periodic structures. Consider an infinite sides of the structure. Substitution of the modal admittances
structure, a fragment of which is depicted in Fig. 1a. As we at (3) and (6) yields
evaluate γ here, we will focus on expressing the correspond-
xx
R (k) =
ing reflection coefficient R of the structure using MNA. xx
xx
 −1
Hence we consider a plane wave with polarization parallel (cid:12) (cid:12)2
(cid:88)(cid:48) (cid:12)J˜ (k ,k )(cid:12) k2 − k2 (7)
to x-axis and the wavevector kˆ normal to the structure. The − 1 + (cid:12) (cid:12) ˜x xn ym (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:113) xn  .
profile of the induced current density is J(x,y) = J (x,y)xˆ+ (cid:12) J x(k x0,k y0) (cid:12) k k2 − k2 − k2
x xn ym
J (x,y)yˆ. MNA suggests an equivalent transmission line
y
For k → 0 we have
scheme for this scattering configuration shown in Fig. 1b:
(L),TE (R),TE R (k) =
Y represents the PEC patch sheet, Y and Y xx
eq 00 00
are the admittances of the fundamental mode in the media  (cid:12) (cid:12)2 −1
(cid:88)(cid:48) (cid:12)J˜ (k ,k )(cid:12) k2
on the left and on the right of the PEC patches respectively. − jk (cid:12) (cid:12) ˜x xn ym (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:113) xn  + O(k2).
The base of MNA is a Floquet modes expansion of electric (cid:12) J x(k x0,k y0) (cid:12) k2 + k2
xn ym
and magnetic fields within the structure. Inherently Y is a
eq
By comparing this expansion with the expansion in the base of
function of modal admittances, and given as [15]
the low-frequency asymptote approach, we identify the electric
 −1
(cid:88) (cid:88)(cid:48) FΠ(k ,k ) polarizability per unit area in terms of the infinite sum
xn ym
Y eq(k) =  (k) (3)
Y (L),Π (k) + Y (R),Π  (cid:12) (cid:12)2 −1
Π=TE,TM mn mn γ (cid:88)(cid:48) (cid:12)J˜ (k ,k )(cid:12) k2
(cid:12) (cid:12)J˜ )(cid:12) (cid:12)2 k2 2x Ax =  (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) J˜x x(kx xn 0,ky ym 0) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:113) k2 x +n k2  . (8)
(k ,k
FTE(k ,k ) = (cid:12) x xn ym (cid:12) ym , (4) xn ym
xn ym (cid:12) J˜ (k ,k ) (cid:12) k2 + k2
(cid:12) x x0 y0 (cid:12) xn ym This is the key formula of the proposed method. Note that for a
symmetric unit cell, the summation is over discrete points of an
FTM(k ,k ) = FTE(k ,k )k2 /k2 , (5)
xn ym xn ym xn ym
even function of both k and k , which reduces the number
xn ym
˜
where J (k ,k ) is the Fourier transform of J (x,y), of terms with approximately a factor of 4. For a non-symmetric
x xn ym x
k = 2πn/P and k = 2πm/P are modal wavenumbers. unit cell, the number of terms is reduced approximately twice
xn x ym y

| None   | None     | None   |    | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   |
|:-------|:---------|:-------|:---|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|
|        | (cid:15) |        |    |        |        |        |        |        |
|        |          |        |    |        |        |        |        |        |
|        |          |        |    |        |        |        |        |        |
|        |          |        |    |        |        |        |        |        |
|        |          |        |    |        |        |        |        |        |
|        |          |        |    |        |        |        |        |        |
|        |          |        |    |        |        |        |        |        |
|        | kˆ       |        |    |        |        |        |        |        |
|        |          |        |    |        |        |        |        |        |
|        |          |        |    |        |        |        |        |        |

ELECTRIC POLARIZABILITY OF PLANAR ARRAYS 3
instead, since the function under the sum is symmetric against mainly due to a limited validity of the analytic current profile
the line k = k due to reality of J (x,y). The numerical J(x,y) in these extreme cases. The polarizabilities of an array
xn ym x
implementation requires a truncation of the sum, and in the of ring-shaped patches (P × P = 5mm×5mm, ring width
x y
results presented in this paper 8 × 8 terms were used. The 0.1mm, analytic current profile [17]) are shown in Fig. 2b, cal-
performance of (8) is validated in Sec. V. culated with our proposed method (solid curves), and the low-
Let us generalize our result to include a dielectric substrate. frequency asymptote, based on CST results (dashed curves).
For this derivation we need to alter the modal admittances Good agreement between the two methods is observed.
on the right side of Y . See Fig. 1b, a dielectric slab of A physical limitation on the bandwidth of transmission
eq
thickness d backing up the patch array can be represented as blockage of electromagnetic waves by a periodic structure is
a transmission line of length d and corresponding admittance given by [18]
Y , connected in series with the infinite transmission line
mn,(cid:15) 1 γ
with admittance Y = Y representing free space. (λ − λ )ln ≤ π2 , (12)
mn,1 mn,(cid:15)=1 2 1
T 2A
The resulting admittance is 0
(cid:16) (cid:113) (cid:17) where the wavelength range between λ 1 and λ 2 has a trans-
Y Π + jtan d (cid:15)k2 − k2 − k2 Y Π
mn,1 xn yn mn,(cid:15) mission coefficient magnitude no higher than some fixed
Y (R),Π = Y Π .
mn mn,(cid:15) (cid:16) (cid:113) (cid:17) value T . Thus, the total attainable bandwidth is limited from
Y Π + jtan d (cid:15)k2 − k2 − k2 Y Π 0
mn,(cid:15) xn yn mn,1 above by polarizability. We observe in Fig. 2a that with
(9)
the same amount of material we can change the value of
Performing the very same steps as done in the non-substrate
polarizability by 100 times just by altering the shape of the
case (substituting the modal admittances in (3) and (6) and
patch. Thus choosing a proper patch shape, i.e. the support for
taking a low frequency expansion) we end up with
the current profile function J(x,y), can drastically increase
 (cid:12) (cid:12)2 −1 the operational bandwidth of a frequency selective structure.
γ (cid:88)(cid:48) (cid:12)J˜ (k ,k )(cid:12) k2 M ((cid:15) − 1)d
2x Ax =  (cid:12) (cid:12) J˜x x(kx xn 0,ky ym (cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:113) kx 2n +m kn  + , bT ao ndil wlu is dt tr hate opt th ie mia zp ap til oic na ,ti won o cf onth sie dep rro ap nos ee xd amap pp leroa oc fh thin
(cid:12) 0) (cid:12) 2 2 a e e
xn ym
blockage bandwidth for a low-pass structure consisting of
(10)
(cid:16) (cid:104) (cid:113) (cid:105)(cid:17)
rectangles. The goal here is to find the smallest rectangular
2 (cid:15) + tanh d k2 + k2
xn ym
area S = w × w reaching a blockage bandwidth B , given
M = . (11) x y 0
mn (cid:104) (cid:113) (cid:105)
2(cid:15) + (1 + (cid:15)2)tanh d k2 + k2 the periodicity P ,P and constraints w ≤ a, w ≤ b. To be
x y x y
xn ym
specific, assume P = P = 5mm, w ≤ 2mm, w ≤ 4mm
x y x y
Note that (cid:15) = 1 or d = 0 yields (8). The expression (10)
and the bandwidth B corresponds according to (12) to the
0
is a good illustration of the physical insight of the proposed polarizability γ = 10−4. By inspection of a parametric sweep
method. The second term can be identified as a contribution
in Fig. 2a, we see, that w = 2mm, w = 1mm with surface
x y
of the free-standing dielectric substrate. The first term gives area S = 2mm2 minimizes such a problem.
the contribution of the patch surface to the polarizability. In
For other shapes of a patch element, we can set up an
each term we identify the same multiple as in the double sum
efficient parametrization for optimization procedures with e.g.
of (8). The factor M accounts for how the presence of the
mn genetic algorithms. Assume we have obtained the current
dielectric enhances the polarizability of the patch array itself.
profile J (x,y) for a given patch element using e.g. a full-
x
The validation of (10) is shown in Sec. V.
wave solver [16]. For the family of shapes, obtained from
the original shape under local stretching and scaling of the
V. RESULTS AND APPLICATIONS shapes parts, the obtained J (x,y), modified with the corre-
x
We consider a rectangular PEC patch array in free space sponding local stretching and scaling, is expected to remain
with the unit cell size P ×P = 5mm×5mm, the total area of a good approximation for a current profile, as indicated by
x y
the patch taking two values S = w ×w = {2,4}mm2. In the numerical examinations. Bandwidth optimization would thus
x y
proposed method, the analytic current profile [15] was used. be applied to parameter variations where the appropriately
In Fig. 2a the normalized polarizability γ /2A, calculated modified J (x,y) is still valid. Observe that such a local
xx x
with our proposed method (solid curves) from (8), by the rescaling of J (x,y) and a calculation of truncated sums in
x
upper bound of variational approach [10] (dash-dotted curves) the proposed method would be significantly faster than the
computed in COMSOL and by the low-frequency asymptote solution of an electrostatic problem for each parametric sweep
approach based on simulations in CST MW Studio (dashed point.
curves), is shown as a function of the patch length w . The We also verified our method for structures with dielectric
x
curves agree well, and also the behavior as w → P is slab inclusions. Consider an infinite array of rectangular
x x
captured by all the approaches. At the limit point w = P patches backed up by a dielectric substrate. The patch size
x x
the structure becomes an array of infinitely long stripes and is fixed to 3mm×1mm and the relative permittivity of the
cease to be low-pass in the x-direction. This explains a higher substrate takes two values (cid:15) = {3,5}. Fig. 2c depicts the
increase rate of the polarizability in this region. One can normalized polarizability as a function of the substrate thick-
also observe a deviation between the proposed method and ness d. The solid curves correspond to the proposed method,
the variational approach when the patch is short and wide dashed represent the results of a low frequency asymptotic
(w ∼ 1mm), and also when w approaches P . This is extraction from full-wave simulation (CST). The dot-dashed
x x x

ELECTRIC POLARIZABILITY OF PLANAR ARRAYS 4
(a)
γ
lines are polarizabilities of a free-standing dielectric slab of the
xx (a)
corresponding material and thickness. We observe that there γ
xx
2A is a good agreement between the result of (10) and the CST-
2A
based estimates. We can see that the total electric polarizability 10−3
−3
10
indeed has a linear term representing the dielectric substrate
contribution. The difference between the solid and dot-dashed S = 4mm2
curves (that is the patch array contribution) seems to be w
x
approximately constant as d becomes greater than some value 10−4
S = 4mm2 S = 2mm2 S w
around 0.8mm. Analysis of the second factor in (11) for the y
lowest order term (e.g. (n,m) = (1,0)) shows that the factor
E
w 0
is almost independent of d when d ≥ P x/(2π) ≈ 0.8mm. x w x,mm
−4 10−5
10 Subsequently the total contribution in the polarizabilty from
0 1 2 3 4 5
the metal patches is approximately constant2as d > 0.8mm.
S = 2mm w (b) (c)
S
×10−3
y γ
γ xx
xx
VI. CONCLUSION 10−3 2A 2A
3
E
The here proposed method to evaluate electric polarizability
0 (cid:15) = 5
has shown a fine agreement with the two alternative ap- (cid:15) = 3
w , mm 2
proaches. The proposed method allows to set up a numerically 10−5 x
−5
10
efficient sweep of geometrical parameters according to the
1
0 strategy intr1oduced in Sec. V. 2Such a parametric3sweep, com- 4 5
bined with the sum rules relating polarizability and operational
10−7
bandwidth (see e.g., [7], [18]), can be used in a bandwidth
0 1 2 0 0.5 1 1.5
optimization. Additionally, the proposed method provides an Outer radius r, mm Substrate thickness d, mm
intuitive understanding of which parts of a structure produce
Fig. 2: (a) Normalized polarizability of an array of rectan-
the most significant contributions to the polarizability value,
gular patches in free space with a fixed surface area S =
see a discussion in the end of Sec. V for an example of a
w × w . (b) Normalized polarizability of an array of ring-
x y
patch array on a dielectric substrate.
shaped patches. (c) Normalized polarizability of an array of
The main limitation of the proposed method arise in finding
3mm×1mm rectangular patches with a dielectric substrate of
a good enough approximation of the electric current’s profile
thickness d and (cid:15) = {3,5}. Details and discussion of the
for the patches of arbitrary shape. Techniques to overcome this
figures is in Sec. V.
limitation is one of the further research directions on this topic
and it closely related with Multimodal Network Approach.
Another interesting directions are to implement several layers
[10] D. Sjo¨berg, “Low frequency scattering by passive periodic structures
of PEC structures [19] and PEC layers of finite non-negligible for oblique incidence: low pass case,” J. Phys. A: Math. Theor., 42, 38,
2009.
thickness.
[11] D. Sjo¨berg, “Variational principles for the static electric and magnetic
polarizability of anisotropic media with PEC inclusions,” J. Phys. A:
Math. Theor., 42, 33, 2009.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
[12] L. Jelinek et al., “Evaluation of polarisability tensors of arbitrarily
shaped highly conducting bodies,” IET Microw. Antennas Propag. 11,
We gratefully acknowledge the support of the SSF grant
6, 2016.
AM13-0011 and VINNOVA project ChaseOn/IAA. We are
[13] R.F. Harrington, “Matrix methods for field problems,” Proceedings of
also grateful for discussions with Prof. Francisco Mesa and the IEEE, 55, 2, 1967.
[14] D. Sjo¨berg et al., “Physical bounds on the all-spectrum transmission
Prof. Raul Rodr´ıguez-Berral.
through periodic arrays: oblique incidence,” Europhysics Letters, 92, 3,
2010.
[15] R. Rodr´ıguez-Berral et al., “Analytical Multimodal Network Approach
REFERENCES
for 2-D Arrays of Planar Patches/Apertures Embedded in a Layered
Medium,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., 63, 5, 2015.
[1] R. Dickie et al., “THz Frequency Selective Surface Filters for Earth Ob-
servation Remote Sensing Instruments”, IEEE Trans. THz Sci. Technol. [16] F. Mesa et al., “Circuit-Model Analysis of Frequency Selective Surfaces
With Scatterers of Arbitrary Geometry,”AWP Letters, 14, 2014.
1, 2, 2011.
[17] R. Dubrovka et al., “Equivalent circuit method for analysis and synthesis
[2] B. Munk, “Frequency Selective Surfaces: Theory and Design,” Wiley
of frequency selective surfaces,”IEE Proc.-Microw. Antennas Propag.,
2006.
153, 3, 2006.
[3] A. Ericsson and D. Sjo¨berg “A Resonant Circular Polarization Selective
[18] M. Gustafsson et al., “Physical bounds on the all-spectrum transmission
Structure of Closely Spaced Morin Helices”, URSI GASS, 2014.
through periodic arrays”, Europhysics Letters, 87, 3, 2009.
[4] R. Mittra et al., “Techniques for Analyzing Frequency Selective Sur-
[19] V. Torres et al., “Accurate Circuit Modeling of Fishnet Structures
faces,” Proceedings of the IEEE, 76, 12, 1988.
for Negative-Index-Medium Applications,”IEEE Trans. Microw. Theory
[5] B. Munk, “Finite Antenna Arrays and FSS,” Wiley 2005.
Techn., 64, 1, 2016.
[6] R. Liu et al., “Broadband Ground-Plane Cloak”, Science 232, 366, 2009.
[7] M. Gustafsson et al., “On the extraordinary transmission through sub-
wavelength apertures in perfectly conducting sheets”, ICEAA, 2011.
[8] D. Rittenhouse, “An optical problem, proposed by Mr. Hopkinson, and
solved by Mr. Rittenhouse,” Trans. Amer. Phil. Soc., 2, 1786.
[9] A. Bernland et al., “Sum rules and constraints on passive systems,” J.
Phys. A: Math. Theor., 44, 14, 2011.

| corresponding material and thickness. We observe that there γ       | None           | None   | None   | None   | None   | None          | None   |
| xx                                                                  |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| is a good agreement between the result of (10) and the CST- 2A      |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| basedestimates.Wecanseethatthetotalelectricpolarizability 10−3      |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| indeed has a linear term representing the dielectric substrate      |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| contribution. The difference between the solid and dot-dashed S =   |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| curves (that is the patch array contribution) seems to be           |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| approximately constant as d becomes greater than some value 10−4    |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| S = 4mm2                                                            |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| around 0.8mm. Analysis of the second factor in (11) for the         |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| lowest order term (e.g. (n,m)=(1,0)) shows that the factor          |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| w                                                                   |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| is almost independent of d when d ≥ P x/(2π) ≈ 0.8mm. x             |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| 10−5                                                                |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| Subsequently the total contribution in the polarizabilty from       |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| 0 1                                                                 |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| the metal patches is apprSoxim=ately2cmonstmant2as d>0.8mm.         |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| S w                                                                 |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| γ y                                                                 |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| xx                                                                  |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| VI. CONCLUSION 10−3 2A                                              |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| E                                                                   |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| Thehereproposedmethodtoevaluateelectricpolarizability               |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| 0                                                                   |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| has shown a fine agreement with the two alternative ap-             |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| w                                                                   |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| proaches.Theproposedmethodallowstosetupanumerically 10−5            |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
| efficient sweep of geometrical parameters according to the          |                |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:--------------|:-------|
|                                                                     |                |        | S =    |        |        | 4mm2          |        |
|                                                                     |                |        |        |        |        | w             |        |
|                                                                     |                |        |        |        |        | x             |        |
|                                                                     |                |        |        |        |        | S =2mm2 S w y |        |
|                                                                     |                |        |        |        |        | E             |        |
|                                                                     |                |        |        |        |        | 0             |        |
|                                                                     |                |        |        |        |        | w             |        |
|                                                                     | the factor     |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | w              |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | 0.8mm. x       |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | 10−5           |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | ilty from      |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | 0 1            |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | 0.8mm.         |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | S w            |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | γ y            |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | xx             |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | 10−3 2A        |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | E              |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | rizability     |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | 0              |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | ative ap-      |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     | merically 10−5 |        |        |        |        |               |        |
|                                                                     |                |        |        |        | w      |               |        |

| 0   | 1   |
|:----|:----|
| S   |     |

| 0   | None   | None   |
|:----|:-------|:-------|
| S   |        |        |
|     |        | γ      |
|     |        | x      |