Disasmo
VS2022 Add‑in. Click on any method or class to see JIT’s codegen and more.
Starting with .NET 7.0 RC1 this add‑in no longer requires a local build of dotnet/runtime repo. How‑
ever, it offers more features with a local one, to obtain a local one please follow these steps:
1 git clone git@github.com:dotnet/runtime.git
2 cd runtime
3 build.cmd Clr+Clr.Aot+Libs -c Release -rc Checked
4
5 # optional (for crossgen2 + arm64 for hw intrinsics):
6 build.cmd Clr.CoreLib -c Release -a arm64
See windows‑requirements.md.
Release notes
See RELEASE_NOTES.md
Installation
ClickonExtensions\Manage Extensionsmenu,selectOnlinetabandtypeDisasmointhe
“Search” text box. Once the add‑in is installed you have to close all active instances of VS2022 to let
the installer finish its job.
1

| 1 git clone git@github.com:dotnet/runtime.git           |
|:--------------------------------------------------------|
| 2 cd runtime                                            |
| 3 build.cmd Clr+Clr.Aot+Libs -c Release -rc Checked     |
| 4                                                       |
| 5 # optional (for crossgen2 + arm64 for hw intrinsics): |
| 6 build.cmd Clr.CoreLib -c Release -a arm64             |

Features
• Hot‑key to quickly see codegen (Alt+Shift+D by default, can be changed in VS’s settings)
• Is able to show codegen for ARM64
• Flowgraphs and JitDumps for JIT contributors
• Diffs
• “System.Runtime.Intrinsics quick search” tab
• Inliner’s decisions
• ‘Run’ mode. Is useful for e.g. PGO inspection
Known Issues
• Only .NET 6.0 and later projects are supported with custom runtime
• .NET 7.0 RC1 (or newer) is needed for non‑custom runtime mode
• I only tested it for simple Console Apps, but it should work for libs as well
• Generic methods are only supported in ‘Run’ mode
• Resharper hides Roslyn actions by default (Uncheck “Do not show Visual Studio Light Bulb”).
• The lightbulb can be slow on first launch
• Whendisassemblingamethodfromaclass,theassociatedC#VisualStudioprojectoroneofits
project files must the active/selected in the solution explorer, otherwise it will generate a blank
disassembly window.
• When disassembling a method that uses a code coming from a NuGet package, Disasmo will
notbeabletofindtheassembly. Theworkaroundistocopytheassemblytothedisasmofolder
created in the output bin folder of the project.
3rd party dependencies
• MvvmLight (MIT)
• AvalonEdit (MIT)
2