     
 
Reforming carbon accounting mechanisms around justice-based principles to 
promote societal sustainability  
 
Technical Annex: Using EE-MRIO tables for the creation of an environmental index 
 
Camilla Seeland1, Piers Reilly1, Ilaria Perissi 1, Roger Samsò2,3 , Diego Andreucci2, Enric Alcover 
Comas2 and Jordi Solè2 
 
1 Anglia Ruskin University, 2 University of Barcelona, 3 Ecological and Forestry Applications Research Centre (CREAF) 
 
Keywords:  Sustainability  index,  Environmentally  Extended  Multi-Regional  Input-Output  model, 
social benefit, decarbonisation, economic sectors, participatory workshop, carbon accounting, system 
dynamics, green deal, decarbonization, carbon price, country-level emission trading 
 
Funding source: This research was funded by an SSH Centre initiative “Socio-economic value vs 
negative impact: Blending SSH and STEM via participatory methods” 
 
Introduction 
 
In this study, we investigate the feasibility of employing an Environmentally Extended Multi-Regional 
Input-Output (EE-MRIO) model to develop an index that effectively portrays the trade-offs between the 
tangible  environmental  impacts  and  societal  benefits  associated  with  various  economic  sectors. 
Subsequently, we intend to apply this index to compare different economic sectors within the EU, 
pinpointing those that excel either due to their substantial societal-benefits and minimal physical impacts 
or conversely, those characterized by the inverse scenario. 
 
To define the index, we utilized the EXIOBASE3 database (Stadler et al., 2021), which  offered a 
chronological sequence of EE-MRIO tables spanning from 1995 to 2022, encompassing data for 44 
countries (including 28 EU member states and 16 major economies) along with five rest-of-the-world 
regions.  
 
For the development of this index, we used the impacts extension in the industry-by-industry format and 
the Multipliers matrix (M) in particular. This matrix furnishes values for 127 distinct stressors (or 
impacts), such as GWP1001 and Employment, per unit of Value Added2. Significantly, the matrix 
concentrates on production, considering both direct and indirect impacts, thereby incorporating all 
upstream effects along the supply chain, spanning both national and international dimensions. 
 
Methodology 
 
Our planned methodology involved the following steps: 
 
1.  Splitting the 127 stressors of the M matrix according to whether they referred to social or 
physical aspects.  
2.  Normalising each impact across all sectors and countries. For instance, the sector within all 
countries with the highest GWP100 got a value of 1 for this impact, while the one with the 
lowest got a 0. Normalizing across sectors and countries allowed us to compare the different 
sectors within each country.  
 
1 100-year Global Warming Potential. 
2 Value added in an industry or sector represents the increase in value resulting from its production processes, calculated by subtracting the 
cost of intermediate goods and services from total revenue. It serves as a key measure of economic efficiency and productivity within an 
 
economy.
  1 

| 1 100-year Global Warming Potential.                                                                                                           |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 2 Value added in an industry or sector represents the increase in value resulting from its production processes, calculated by subtracting the |
| cost of intermediate goods and services from total revenue. It serves as a key measure of economic efficiency and productivity within an       |
| economy.                                                                                                                                       |

     
 
3.  To obtain a single figure between 0 and 1 for the social dimension, and the same for the physical 
dimension. This implied finding a way to aggregate social impacts and physical impacts among 
them (e.g., weighted sum). Since the chapter focuses on climate change, higher weight was 
given to emissions related impacts, and lower weight to less relevant impacts (e.g., water 
pollution). 
4.  Then, the qualitative index was materialised by representing each sector in a plot with the 
physical dimension on the x-axis and the social dimension on the y-axis. This was done for each 
country separately. 
5.  Then, to give the index a quantitative value, we divided the sectors of each country into four 
different groups (1: Low social impact and low physical impact; 2: Low social impact and high 
physical impact; 3: High social impact and low physical impact and 4: High social impact and 
high physical impact) and then counted the number of times each sector appeared in each group, 
for all countries in the EU. 
6.  Made visualisations to show how the different sectors fare along the two dimensions. 
7.  One could do the same for the different years available in EXIOBASE3, to see changes over 
time. 
 
Results 
 
We started by classifying the impacts according to whether they are social or physical impacts. We 
found that there were 29 social impacts and 98 physical impacts (see Tables 1 and 2 in the Appendix 1). 
From those, we excluded Value Added, as it was either 1 or 0 (the M matrix gives values of the impact 
per unit of Value Added), resulting in 28 social impacts. 
Then, from the resulting matrix we selected only the data for countries within the EU, and for each 
country, we removed the sectors which have all impacts equal to 0, which implies that a particular sector 
does not exist in that specific country. 
Upon further analysis of the data, we identified several issues with the different impacts: 
 
1.  For the physical impacts, elevated values typically denote adverse outcomes. However, for the 
social impacts, higher values can signify both positive outcomes (e.g., Employment, Value 
Added) or negative ones (e.g., Human Toxicity).  
2.  Like the previous point, for certain indicators (e.g., Human Toxicity), low values should not 
necessarily be considered a positive social outcome, but rather the high values should affect the 
social dimension negatively.  
3.  Presence of big outliers, corresponding to sectors with very low-Value Added. For instance, the 
Employment impact for the “Re-processing of secondary plastic into new plastic” sector in 
Finland gives a value of 120 M people per unit of Value Added (for reference, Finland’s 
population is roughly 5.4 M). This is problematic when normalizing, as we get binary values 
(either 1 or very close to 0). 
4.  It is also challenging to define what impact value should become 1 when normalizing. To 
illustrate this point, let us imagine two sectors that are heavy emitters. However, if one clearly 
stands out from the other, the latter would get a value smaller than 1, which does not reflect the 
reality of the situation. In other words, beyond a certain emissions threshold, it becomes less 
pertinent to distinguish between the severity of emissions. In such cases, both sectors may be 
assigned the worst normalised impact value (i.e., 1). 
5.  High autocorrelation between impacts of the two dimensions (e.g., Water toxicity and human 
toxicity). 
6.  High autocorrelation between the physical impacts themselves. 
7.  High autocorrelation between the social impacts (see Figure 1). 
8.  Some  data  inconsistencies  (e.g.  negative  Employment  values  for  some  sectors  in  some 
countries). 
  2 

     
 
9.  There are a limited number of social indicators. Some key social indicators such as Education 
(access to education and level of education), health (physical and mental health, happiness 
index), Social equality (poverty, income vs living cost, welfare system), and human thriving 
(job quality, purpose) are not included. 
 
Figure 1: Autocorrelation matrix for social impacts of Estonia, from 2015.   
  3 

     
 
Final approach 
 
The issues highlighted above are intrinsic results of this experiment and independently underscore the 
limitations of relying on aggregated econometric databases for assessing the sustainability of various 
economic sectors.  
In the upcoming paragraphs, we elucidate the approach taken to address each of the identified issues, 
along with the necessary compromises made about the initially planned methodology. 
For points 1 and 2, the simplest workaround was to subtract the values of social indicators for which 
high values represent a negative outcome, rather than adding them up, when calculating the social 
dimension. 
To deal with points 3 and 4, before normalizing we replaced the values above a certain percentile (e.g. 
90th percentile) by the value of the percentile itself. This way, when normalizing, all values originally 
above that figure will get a value of 1. This works well to deal with outliers due to low Value Added, 
and to deal with what should be considered a high value for each specific impact (see issue number 4). 
The negative values of Employment (see point 8) were simply fixed by replacing them with 0. Although 
the solution for this impact was simple, it is prudent to consider the possibility that other discrepancies 
may exist for other impacts. Consequently, it is advisable to exercise caution when using EE-MRIO data 
when precision in the results is crucial. 
Among all the issues encountered, the most complex to deal with were those of points 5, 6, 7 and 9. 
Indeed, the number of social indicators included in the impact extension of EXIOBASE3 is limited and 
may not be easily extended within the context of the current project. On the other hand, the issue of 
autocorrelation (points 6, 7 and 8), left us with only two independent social indicators, which were 
Employment and Human Toxicity. While acknowledging that correlation does not necessarily imply 
causation, the incorporation of correlated parameters in an aggregated index may lead, among others, to 
skewed weighting, potentially distorting the accuracy and reliability of the index. 
Moreover,  depending  exclusively  on  these  two  social  indicators  could  provide  a  misleading 
representation if we were to designate the result as the complete "social" dimension. Additionally, 
introducing  several  physical  indicators  in  contrast  to  just  two  social  indicators  would  create  an 
imbalance between the two dimensions. Therefore, given the focus on climate change in this chapter 
and as an initial approach, we adhere to the steps outlined in the planned methodology, but we restrict 
our  selection  to  GWP100  and  Employment  as  representatives  of  physical  and  social  indicators, 
respectively. 
 
Example indicator 
Figure 2 represents the percentage of times each sector has been placed in the 4 groups detailed in point 
5 of the original methodology. 
 
Figure 2: 
percentage of times 
each sector has 
been classified as 
low GWP and low 
Employment (blue), 
low GWP and high 
Employment 
(orange), high 
GWP and low 
Employment 
(green) and high 
GWP and high 
Employment (red). 
 
   
  4 

     
 
 
Figure 3: sectors classified as high GWP100 50% of the time or more. Blue bars correspond to high GWP and 
low Employment and orange bars correspond to high GWP and high Employment. 
 
In the previous figure, the bars which are mostly blue correspond to sectors which not only have high 
GWP100 but also produce low employment. Therefore, if the social and physical dimensions had been 
obtained  by  aggregating  several  impacts  each,  these  would  be  the  sectors  that  would  need  to  be 
reconsidered in a future scenario combining ecological sustainability and human well-being. 
Hence, though exploring only two impacts per dimension is an oversimplification, this experiment 
shows the potential interest of this approach for classifying sectors according to their compromise 
between physical impacts and societal-benefits. 
 
Conclusions 
In this work, we have investigated the potential use of EE-MRIO databases to create a sustainability 
index to illustrate the trade-offs between the concrete environmental impacts and societal advantages 
linked to diverse economic sectors. 
We have presented a methodological approach and shown that, in its current state, the EE-MRIO 
database from EXIOBASE3 may not be adequate for achieving the specific results we aimed to obtain 
through this study. 
Complemented the methodology with an example of what could be achieved in the future, if more social 
indicators are added to the EE-MRIO databases but using only one impact per dimension. 
This  work  has  demonstrated  not  only  the  knowledge  gaps  and  information  required  for  a  better 
characterization of the links between environmental impacts and human/social aspects but also provides 
insights on how to address such gaps and lack of information. This chapter highlights the advantages of 
having more information and data to improve understanding of the environment-ecosystem-society-
economy links, which is crucial for future evaluations of the necessary socio-economic changes for 
implementing the transition to a low-carbon society. 
 
Bibliography 
 
Stadler, K., Wood, R., Bulavskaya, T., Södersten, C.-J., Simas, M., Schmidt, S., Usubiaga, A., Acosta-
Fernández, J., Kuenen, J., Bruckner, M., Giljum, S., Lutter, S., Merciai, S., Schmidt, J. H., Theurl, M. 
C., Plutzar, C., Kastner, T., Eisenmenger, N., Erb, K.-H., … Tukker, A. (2021). EXIOBASE 3 (3.8.2) 
[Data set]. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5589597   
  5 

     
 
Appendix 1. Indicators 
 
Table 1: Physical impacts list. 
Impact name  Unit 
GHG emissions (GWP100) | Problem oriented approach: baseline (CML,  kg CO2 eq. 
2001) | GWP100 (IPCC, 2007) 
Fresh water Ecotoxicity (USEtox) | USEtox2008 | CTUe (Rosenbaum et al.,  PAF m3.day 
2008) 
Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by ecotoxic emissions (H.A) |  PDF*m2*yr 
ECOINDICATOR 99 (H.A) | Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by 
ecotoxic emissions (H.A) 
Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by the combined effect of acidification  PDF*m2*yr 
and eutrophication (H.A) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (H.A) | Damage to 
Ecosystem Quality caused by the combined effect of acidification and 
eutrophication (H.A) 
Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by ecotoxic emissions (E.E)) |  PDF*m2*yr 
ECOINDICATOR 99 (E.E) | Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by 
ecotoxic emissions (E.E)) 
Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by the combined effect of acidification  PDF*m2*yr 
and eutrophication (E.E) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (E.E) | Damage to Ecosystem 
Quality caused by the combined effect of acidification and eutrophication 
(E.E) 
Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by ecotoxic emissions (I.I) |  PDF*m2*yr 
ECOINDICATOR 99 (I.I) | Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by ecotoxic 
emissions (I.I) 
Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by the combined effect of acidification  PDF*m2*yr 
and eutrophication (I.I) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (I.I) | Damage to Ecosystem 
Quality caused by the combined effect of acidification and eutrophication (I.I) 
Unused Domestic Extraction  kt 
Water Consumption Green - Agriculture  Mm3 
Water Consumption Blue - Agriculture  Mm3 
Water Consumption Blue - Livestock  Mm3 
Water Consumption Blue - Manufacturing  Mm3 
Water Consumption Blue - Electricity  Mm3 
Water Consumption Blue - Domestic  Mm3 
Water Consumption Blue - Total  Mm3 
Water Withdrawal Blue - Manufacturing  Mm3 
Water Withdrawal Blue - Electricity  Mm3 
Water Withdrawal Blue - Domestic  Mm3 
Water Withdrawal Blue - Total  Mm3 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) IPCC categories 1 to 4 and 6 to 7 (excl land use, land  Gg 
use change and forestry) 
Methane (CH4) IPCC categories 1 to 4 and 6 to 7 (excl land use, land use  Gg 
change and forestry) 
  6 

| Impact name                                                                     | Unit       |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------|
| GHG emissions (GWP100) | Problem oriented approach: baseline (CML,              | kg CO2 eq. |
| 2001) | GWP100 (IPCC, 2007)                                                     |            |
| Fresh water Ecotoxicity (USEtox) | USEtox2008 | CTUe (Rosenbaum et al.,         | PAF m3.day |
| 2008)                                                                           |            |
| Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by ecotoxic emissions (H.A) |                | PDF*m2*yr  |
| ECOINDICATOR 99 (H.A) | Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by                   |            |
| ecotoxic emissions (H.A)                                                        |            |
| Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by the combined effect of acidification      | PDF*m2*yr  |
| and eutrophication (H.A) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (H.A) | Damage to                    |            |
| Ecosystem Quality caused by the combined effect of acidification and            |            |
| eutrophication (H.A)                                                            |            |
| Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by ecotoxic emissions (E.E)) |               | PDF*m2*yr  |
| ECOINDICATOR 99 (E.E) | Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by                   |            |
| ecotoxic emissions (E.E))                                                       |            |
| Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by the combined effect of acidification      | PDF*m2*yr  |
| and eutrophication (E.E) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (E.E) | Damage to Ecosystem          |            |
| Quality caused by the combined effect of acidification and eutrophication       |            |
| (E.E)                                                                           |            |
| Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by ecotoxic emissions (I.I) |                | PDF*m2*yr  |
| ECOINDICATOR 99 (I.I) | Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by ecotoxic          |            |
| emissions (I.I)                                                                 |            |
| Damage to Ecosystem Quality caused by the combined effect of acidification      | PDF*m2*yr  |
| and eutrophication (I.I) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (I.I) | Damage to Ecosystem          |            |
| Quality caused by the combined effect of acidification and eutrophication (I.I) |            |
| Unused Domestic Extraction                                                      | kt         |
| Water Consumption Green - Agriculture                                           | Mm3        |
| Water Consumption Blue - Agriculture                                            | Mm3        |
| Water Consumption Blue - Livestock                                              | Mm3        |
| Water Consumption Blue - Manufacturing                                          | Mm3        |
| Water Consumption Blue - Electricity                                            | Mm3        |
| Water Consumption Blue - Domestic                                               | Mm3        |
| Water Consumption Blue - Total                                                  | Mm3        |
| Water Withdrawal Blue - Manufacturing                                           | Mm3        |
| Water Withdrawal Blue - Electricity                                             | Mm3        |
| Water Withdrawal Blue - Domestic                                                | Mm3        |
| Water Withdrawal Blue - Total                                                   | Mm3        |
| Carbon dioxide (CO2) IPCC categories 1 to 4 and 6 to 7 (excl land use, land     | Gg         |
| use change and forestry)                                                        |            |
| Methane (CH4) IPCC categories 1 to 4 and 6 to 7 (excl land use, land use        | Gg         |
| change and forestry)                                                            |            |

     
 
Nitrous Oxide (N2O) IPCC categories 1 to 4 and 6 to 7 (excl land use, land  Gg 
use change and forestry) 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) CO2EQ IPCC categories 1 to 4 and 6 to 7 (excl land  Gg CO2-eq 
use, land use change and forestry) 
Methane (CH4) CO2EQ IPCC categories 1 to 4 and 6 to 7 (excl land use, land  Gg CO2-eq 
use change and forestry) 
Nitrous Oxide (N2O) CO2EQ IPCC categories 1 to 4 and 6 to 7 (excl land  Gg CO2-eq 
use, land use change and forestry) 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) Fuel combustion and cement  Gg 
Carbon dioxide (CO2) Fuel combustion  Gg 
GHG emissions (GWP100) | Problem oriented approach: baseline (CML,  kg CO2 eq. 
1999) | GWP100 (IPCC, 2007) 
GHG emissions (GWP100min) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline  kg CO2 eq. 
(CML, 1999) | net GWP100 min(Houghton et al., 2001) 
GHG emissions (GWP100max) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline  kg CO2 eq. 
(CML, 1999) | net GWP100 max(Houghton et al., 2001) 
GHG emissions (GWP20) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline (CML,  kg CO2 eq. 
1999) | GWP20 (IPCC, 2007) 
GHG emissions (GWP500) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline (CML,  kg CO2 eq. 
1999) | GWP500 (IPCC, 2007) 
ozone layer depletion (ODP steady state) | Problem oriented approach:  kg CFC-11 eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | ODP steady state (WMO, 2003) 
Freshwater aquatic ecotoxicity (FAETP inf) | Problem oriented approach:  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | FAETP inf. (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Marine aquatic ecotoxicity (MAETP inf) | Problem oriented approach:  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | MAETP inf. (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Freshwater sedimental ecotoxicity (FSETP inf) | Problem oriented approach:  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
non baseline (CML, 1999) | FSETP inf. (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Marine sedimental ecotoxicity (MSETP inf) | Problem oriented approach: non  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | MSETP inf. (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Terrestrial ecotoxicity (TETP inf) | Problem oriented approach: baseline  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
(CML, 1999) | TETP inf.(Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Freshwater aquatic ecotoxicity (FAETP20) | Problem oriented approach: non  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | FAETP 20 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Marine aquatic ecotoxicity (MAETP20) | Problem oriented approach: non  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | MAETP 20 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Freshwater sedimental ecotoxicity (FSETP20) | Problem oriented approach:  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
non baseline (CML, 1999) | FSETP 20 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Marine sedimental ecotoxicity (MSETP20) | Problem oriented approach: non  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | MSETP 20 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Terrestrial ecotoxicity (TETP20) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
(CML, 1999) | TETP 20 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Freshwater aquatic ecotoxicity (FAETP100) | Problem oriented approach: non  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | FAETP 100 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Marine aquatic ecotoxicity (MAETP100) | Problem oriented approach: non  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | MAETP 100 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
  7 

| Nitrous Oxide (N2O) IPCC categories 1 to 4 and 6 to 7 (excl land use, land   | Gg                         |
| use change and forestry)                                                     |                            |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------|
| Carbon dioxide (CO2) CO2EQ IPCC categories 1 to 4 and 6 to 7 (excl land      | Gg CO2-eq                  |
| use, land use change and forestry)                                           |                            |
| Methane (CH4) CO2EQ IPCC categories 1 to 4 and 6 to 7 (excl land use, land   | Gg CO2-eq                  |
| use change and forestry)                                                     |                            |
| Nitrous Oxide (N2O) CO2EQ IPCC categories 1 to 4 and 6 to 7 (excl land       | Gg CO2-eq                  |
| use, land use change and forestry)                                           |                            |
| Carbon dioxide (CO2) Fuel combustion and cement                              | Gg                         |
| Carbon dioxide (CO2) Fuel combustion                                         | Gg                         |
| GHG emissions (GWP100) | Problem oriented approach: baseline (CML,           | kg CO2 eq.                 |
| 1999) | GWP100 (IPCC, 2007)                                                  |                            |
| GHG emissions (GWP100min) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline          | kg CO2 eq.                 |
| (CML, 1999) | net GWP100 min(Houghton et al., 2001)                          |                            |
| GHG emissions (GWP100max) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline          | kg CO2 eq.                 |
| (CML, 1999) | net GWP100 max(Houghton et al., 2001)                          |                            |
| GHG emissions (GWP20) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline (CML,        | kg CO2 eq.                 |
| 1999) | GWP20 (IPCC, 2007)                                                   |                            |
| GHG emissions (GWP500) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline (CML,       | kg CO2 eq.                 |
| 1999) | GWP500 (IPCC, 2007)                                                  |                            |
| ozone layer depletion (ODP steady state) | Problem oriented approach:        | kg CFC-11 eq.              |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | ODP steady state (WMO, 2003)                          |                            |
| Freshwater aquatic ecotoxicity (FAETP inf) | Problem oriented approach:      | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | FAETP inf. (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                  |                            |
| Marine aquatic ecotoxicity (MAETP inf) | Problem oriented approach:          | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | MAETP inf. (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                  |                            |
| Freshwater sedimental ecotoxicity (FSETP inf) | Problem oriented approach:   | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. |
| non baseline (CML, 1999) | FSETP inf. (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)              |                            |
| Marine sedimental ecotoxicity (MSETP inf) | Problem oriented approach: non   | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | MSETP inf. (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                  |                            |
| Terrestrial ecotoxicity (TETP inf) | Problem oriented approach: baseline     | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. |
| (CML, 1999) | TETP inf.(Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                             |                            |
| Freshwater aquatic ecotoxicity (FAETP20) | Problem oriented approach: non    | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | FAETP 20 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                    |                            |
| Marine aquatic ecotoxicity (MAETP20) | Problem oriented approach: non        | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | MAETP 20 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                    |                            |
| Freshwater sedimental ecotoxicity (FSETP20) | Problem oriented approach:     | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. |
| non baseline (CML, 1999) | FSETP 20 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                |                            |
| Marine sedimental ecotoxicity (MSETP20) | Problem oriented approach: non     | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | MSETP 20 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                    |                            |
| Terrestrial ecotoxicity (TETP20) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline   | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. |
| (CML, 1999) | TETP 20 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                              |                            |
| Freshwater aquatic ecotoxicity (FAETP100) | Problem oriented approach: non   | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | FAETP 100 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                   |                            |
| Marine aquatic ecotoxicity (MAETP100) | Problem oriented approach: non       | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | MAETP 100 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                   |                            |

     
 
Freshwater sedimental ecotoxicity (FSETP100) | Problem oriented approach:  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
non baseline (CML, 1999) | FSETP 100 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Marine sedimental ecotoxicity (MSETP100) | Problem oriented approach: non  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | MSETP 100 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Terrestrial ecotoxicity (TETP100) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
(CML, 1999) | TETP 100 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Freshwater aquatic ecotoxicity (FAETP500) | Problem oriented approach: non  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | FAETP 500 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Marine aquatic ecotoxicity (MAETP500) | Problem oriented approach: non  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | MAETP 500 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Freshwater sedimental ecotoxicity (FSETP500) | Problem oriented approach:  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
non baseline (CML, 1999) | FSETP 500 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Marine sedimental ecotoxicity (MSETP500) | Problem oriented approach: non  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | MSETP 500 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) 
Terrestrial ecotoxicity (TETP500) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline  kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq. 
(CML, 1999) | TETP 500 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) TETP 500 
photochemical oxidation (high NOx) | Problem oriented approach: baseline  kg ethylene eq. 
(CML, 1999) | POCP (Jenkin & Hayman, 1999; Derwent et al. 1998; high 
NOx) 
photochemical oxidation (low NOx) | Problem oriented approach: non  kg ethylene eq. 
baseline (CML, 1999) | POCP (Andersson-Skï¿½ld et al. 1992; low NOx) 
photochemical oxidation (MIR; very high NOx) | Problem oriented approach:  kg formed ozone 
non baseline (CML, 1999) | MIR 1997; very high NOx (Carter, 1994, 1997, 
1998;Carter, Pierce, Luo & Malkina, 1995 ) 
photochemical oxidation (MOIR; high NOx) | Problem oriented approach:  kg formed ozone 
non baseline (CML, 1999) | MOIR; high NOx (Carter, 1994, 1997, 
1998;Carter, Pierce, Luo & Malkina, 1995 ) 
photochemical oxidation (EBIR; low NOx) | Problem oriented approach: non  kg formed ozone 
baseline (CML, 1999) | EBIR; low NOx (Carter, 1994, 1997, 1998;Carter, 
Pierce, Luo & Malkina, 1995 ) 
acidification (incl. fate, average Europe total, A&B) | Problem oriented  kg SO2 eq. 
approach: baseline (CML, 1999) | AP ( Huijbregts, 1999; average Europe 
total, A&B) 
acidification (fate not incl.) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline (CML,  kg SO2 eq. 
1999) | AP (Hauschild & Wenzel (1998). 
eutrophication (fate not incl.) | Problem oriented approach: baseline (CML,  kg PO4— eq. 
1999) | EP (Heijungs et al. 1992)) 
eutrophication (incl. fate, average Europe total, A&B) | Problem oriented  kg NOx eq. 
approach: non baseline (CML, 1999) | EP ( Huijbregts, 1999; average Europe 
total, A&B) 
Climate change midpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Global warming  kg CO2-Equivalents 
potential 100 years 
Climate change endpoint, ecosystems | ILCD recommended CF | Potentially  PDF 
Disappeared Fraction of species (PDF) 
Acidification midpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Accumulated Exceedance  Accumulated Exceedance 
(AE)  (AE) 
  8 

| Freshwater sedimental ecotoxicity (FSETP100) | Problem oriented approach:      | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq.   |
| non baseline (CML, 1999) | FSETP 100 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                 |                              |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------|
| Marine sedimental ecotoxicity (MSETP100) | Problem oriented approach: non      | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq.   |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | MSETP 100 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                     |                              |
| Terrestrial ecotoxicity (TETP100) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline    | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq.   |
| (CML, 1999) | TETP 100 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                               |                              |
| Freshwater aquatic ecotoxicity (FAETP500) | Problem oriented approach: non     | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq.   |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | FAETP 500 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                     |                              |
| Marine aquatic ecotoxicity (MAETP500) | Problem oriented approach: non         | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq.   |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | MAETP 500 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                     |                              |
| Freshwater sedimental ecotoxicity (FSETP500) | Problem oriented approach:      | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq.   |
| non baseline (CML, 1999) | FSETP 500 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                 |                              |
| Marine sedimental ecotoxicity (MSETP500) | Problem oriented approach: non      | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq.   |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | MSETP 500 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                     |                              |
| Terrestrial ecotoxicity (TETP500) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline    | kg 1,4-dichlorobenzene eq.   |
| (CML, 1999) | TETP 500 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000) TETP 500                      |                              |
| photochemical oxidation (high NOx) | Problem oriented approach: baseline       | kg ethylene eq.              |
| (CML, 1999) | POCP (Jenkin & Hayman, 1999; Derwent et al. 1998; high           |                              |
| NOx)                                                                           |                              |
| photochemical oxidation (low NOx) | Problem oriented approach: non             | kg ethylene eq.              |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | POCP (Andersson-Skï¿½ld et al. 1992; low NOx)           |                              |
| photochemical oxidation (MIR; very high NOx) | Problem oriented approach:      | kg formed ozone              |
| non baseline (CML, 1999) | MIR 1997; very high NOx (Carter, 1994, 1997,        |                              |
| 1998;Carter, Pierce, Luo & Malkina, 1995 )                                     |                              |
| photochemical oxidation (MOIR; high NOx) | Problem oriented approach:          | kg formed ozone              |
| non baseline (CML, 1999) | MOIR; high NOx (Carter, 1994, 1997,                 |                              |
| 1998;Carter, Pierce, Luo & Malkina, 1995 )                                     |                              |
| photochemical oxidation (EBIR; low NOx) | Problem oriented approach: non       | kg formed ozone              |
| baseline (CML, 1999) | EBIR; low NOx (Carter, 1994, 1997, 1998;Carter,         |                              |
| Pierce, Luo & Malkina, 1995 )                                                  |                              |
| acidification (incl. fate, average Europe total, A&B) | Problem oriented       | kg SO2 eq.                   |
| approach: baseline (CML, 1999) | AP ( Huijbregts, 1999; average Europe         |                              |
| total, A&B)                                                                    |                              |
| acidification (fate not incl.) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline (CML, | kg SO2 eq.                   |
| 1999) | AP (Hauschild & Wenzel (1998).                                         |                              |
| eutrophication (fate not incl.) | Problem oriented approach: baseline (CML,    | kg PO4— eq.                  |
| 1999) | EP (Heijungs et al. 1992))                                             |                              |
| eutrophication (incl. fate, average Europe total, A&B) | Problem oriented      | kg NOx eq.                   |
| approach: non baseline (CML, 1999) | EP ( Huijbregts, 1999; average Europe     |                              |
| total, A&B)                                                                    |                              |
| Climate change midpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Global warming                 | kg CO2-Equivalents           |
| potential 100 years                                                            |                              |
| Climate change endpoint, ecosystems | ILCD recommended CF | Potentially        | PDF                          |
| Disappeared Fraction of species (PDF)                                          |                              |
| Acidification midpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Accumulated Exceedance          | Accumulated Exceedance       |
| (AE)                                                                           | (AE)                         |

     
 
Acidification endpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Change in potentially not  PDF 
occuring fraction of plant species per change in base saturation 
Eutrophication terrestrial midpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Accumulated  Accumulated Exceedance 
Exceedance (AE)  (AE) 
Eutrophication marine midpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Potentially  kg-N equivalent 
Disappeared Fraction of species (PDF) 
Ecotoxicity freshwater midpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Comparative  CTUe = PAF.m3.year 
Toxic Unit for ecosystems (CTUe) 
Ecotoxicity freshwater endpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Potentially  PDF.m3.year 
Disappeared Fraction of species (PDF) 
GHG emissions AR5 (GWP100) | GWP100 (IPCC, 2010)  kg CO2 eq. 
Nitrogen  kg 
Phosphorous  kg 
PM10  kg 
PM25  kg 
SOx  kg 
NOx  kg 
Domestic Extraction Used - Crop and Crop Residue  kt 
Domestic Extraction Used - Grazing and Fodder  kt 
Domestic Extraction Used - Forestry and Timber  kt 
Domestic Extraction Used - Fisheries  kt 
Domestic Extraction Used - Non-metalic Minerals  kt 
Domestic Extraction Used - Iron Ore  kt 
Domestic Extraction Used - Non-ferous metal ores  kt 
Unused Domestic Extraction - Crop and Crop Residue  kt 
Unused Domestic Extraction - Grazing and Fodder  kt 
Unused Domestic Extraction - Forestry and Timber  kt 
Unused Domestic Extraction - Fisheries  kt 
Unused Domestic Extraction - Coal and Peat  kt 
Unused Domestic Extraction - Oil and Gas  kt 
Unused Domestic Extraction - Non-metalic Minerals  kt 
Unused Domestic Extraction - Iron Ore  kt 
Unused Domestic Extraction - Non-ferous metal ores  kt 
Land use Crop, Forest, Pasture  km2 
 
Table 2: Social impacts list. 
Impact name  Unit 
Value Added  M.EUR 
Employment  1000 p. 
Employment hour  hr 
Human toxicity (USEtox) | USEtox2008 | CTUh (Rosenbaum et al., 2008)  cases 
Carcinogenic effects on humans (H.A) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (H.A) | Carcinogenic  DALY 
effects on humans (H.A) 
  9 

| Acidification endpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Change in potentially not   | PDF                    |
| occuring fraction of plant species per change in base saturation           |                        |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------|
| Eutrophication terrestrial midpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Accumulated    | Accumulated Exceedance |
| Exceedance (AE)                                                            | (AE)                   |
| Eutrophication marine midpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Potentially         | kg-N equivalent        |
| Disappeared Fraction of species (PDF)                                      |                        |
| Ecotoxicity freshwater midpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Comparative        | CTUe = PAF.m3.year     |
| Toxic Unit for ecosystems (CTUe)                                           |                        |
| Ecotoxicity freshwater endpoint | ILCD recommended CF | Potentially        | PDF.m3.year            |
| Disappeared Fraction of species (PDF)                                      |                        |
| GHG emissions AR5 (GWP100) | GWP100 (IPCC, 2010)                           | kg CO2 eq.             |
| Nitrogen                                                                   | kg                     |
| Phosphorous                                                                | kg                     |
| PM10                                                                       | kg                     |
| PM25                                                                       | kg                     |
| SOx                                                                        | kg                     |
| NOx                                                                        | kg                     |
| Domestic Extraction Used - Crop and Crop Residue                           | kt                     |
| Domestic Extraction Used - Grazing and Fodder                              | kt                     |
| Domestic Extraction Used - Forestry and Timber                             | kt                     |
| Domestic Extraction Used - Fisheries                                       | kt                     |
| Domestic Extraction Used - Non-metalic Minerals                            | kt                     |
| Domestic Extraction Used - Iron Ore                                        | kt                     |
| Domestic Extraction Used - Non-ferous metal ores                           | kt                     |
| Unused Domestic Extraction - Crop and Crop Residue                         | kt                     |
| Unused Domestic Extraction - Grazing and Fodder                            | kt                     |
| Unused Domestic Extraction - Forestry and Timber                           | kt                     |
| Unused Domestic Extraction - Fisheries                                     | kt                     |
| Unused Domestic Extraction - Coal and Peat                                 | kt                     |
| Unused Domestic Extraction - Oil and Gas                                   | kt                     |
| Unused Domestic Extraction - Non-metalic Minerals                          | kt                     |
| Unused Domestic Extraction - Iron Ore                                      | kt                     |
| Unused Domestic Extraction - Non-ferous metal ores                         | kt                     |
| Land use Crop, Forest, Pasture                                             | km2                    |

| Impact name                                                                 | Unit    |
|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------|
| Value Added                                                                 | M.EUR   |
| Employment                                                                  | 1000 p. |
| Employment hour                                                             | hr      |
| Human toxicity (USEtox) | USEtox2008 | CTUh (Rosenbaum et al., 2008)        | cases   |
| Carcinogenic effects on humans (H.A) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (H.A) | Carcinogenic | DALY    |
| effects on humans (H.A)                                                     |         |

     
 
Respiratory effects on humans caused by organic substances (H.A) | ECOINDICATOR  DALY 
99 (H.A) | Respiratory effects on humans caused by organic substances (H.A) 
Respiratory effects on humans caused by inorganic substances (H.A) |  DALY 
ECOINDICATOR 99 (H.A) | Respiratory effects on humans caused by inorganic 
substances (H.A) 
Damages to human health caused by climate change (H.A) | ECOINDICATOR 99  DALY 
(H.A) | Damages to human health caused by climate change (H.A) 
Carcinogenic effects on humans (E.E) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (E.E) | Carcinogenic  DALY 
effects on humans (E.E) 
Respiratory effects on humans caused by organic substances (E.E) | ECOINDICATOR  DALY 
99 (E.E) | Respiratory effects on humans caused by organic substances (E.E) 
Respiratory effects on humans caused by inorganic substances (E.E) |  DALY 
ECOINDICATOR 99 (E.E) | Respiratory effects on humans caused by inorganic 
substances (E.E) 
Damages to human health caused by climate change (E.E) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (E.E)  DALY 
| Damages to human health caused by climate change (E.E) 
Carcinogenic effects on humans (I.I) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (I.I) | Carcinogenic effects  DALY 
on humans (I.I) 
Respiratory effects on humans caused by organic substances (I.I) | ECOINDICATOR  DALY 
99 (I.I) | Respiratory effects on humans caused by organic substances (I.I) 
Respiratory effects on humans caused by inorganic substances (I.I) | ECOINDICATOR  DALY 
99 (I.I) | Respiratory effects on humans caused by inorganic substances (I.I) 
Damages to human health caused by climate change (I.I) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (I.I) |  DALY 
Damages to human health caused by climate change (I.I) 
human toxicity (HTP inf) | Problem oriented approach: baseline (CML, 1999) | HTP  kg 1,4-
inf. (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)  dichlorobenzene eq. 
human toxicity (HTP20) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline (CML, 1999) | HTP  kg 1,4-
20 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)  dichlorobenzene eq. 
human toxicity (HTP100) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline (CML, 1999) |  kg 1,4-
HTP 100 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)  dichlorobenzene eq. 
human toxicity (HTP500) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline (CML, 1999) |  kg 1,4-
HTP 500 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)  dichlorobenzene eq. 
Climate change endpoint, human health | ILCD recommended CF | Disability Adjusted  DALY 
Life Years (DALY) 
Human toxicity midpoint, cancer effects | ILCD recommended CF | Comparative Toxic  CTUh/kg = cases 
Unit for human (CTUh) 
Human toxicity midpoint, non-cancer effects | ILCD recommended CF | Comparative  CTUh = cases 
Toxic Unit for human (CTUh) 
Human toxicity endpoint, cancer effects | ILCD recommended CF | Disability Adjusted  DALY 
Life Years (DALY) 
Human toxicity endpoint, non-cancer effects | ILCD recommended CF | Disability  DALY 
Adjusted Life Years (DALY) 
Particulate matter/Respiratory inorganics midpoint | ILCD recommended CF |  kg PM2.5-eq 
emission-weighed average PM2.5 equivalent 
Particulate matter/Respiratory inorganics endpoint | ILCD recommended CF |  DALY 
Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALY) 
  10 

| Respiratory effects on humans caused by organic substances (H.A) | ECOINDICATOR     | DALY                |
| 99 (H.A) | Respiratory effects on humans caused by organic substances (H.A)         |                     |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------|
| Respiratory effects on humans caused by inorganic substances (H.A) |                | DALY                |
| ECOINDICATOR 99 (H.A) | Respiratory effects on humans caused by inorganic           |                     |
| substances (H.A)                                                                    |                     |
| Damages to human health caused by climate change (H.A) | ECOINDICATOR 99            | DALY                |
| (H.A) | Damages to human health caused by climate change (H.A)                      |                     |
| Carcinogenic effects on humans (E.E) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (E.E) | Carcinogenic         | DALY                |
| effects on humans (E.E)                                                             |                     |
| Respiratory effects on humans caused by organic substances (E.E) | ECOINDICATOR     | DALY                |
| 99 (E.E) | Respiratory effects on humans caused by organic substances (E.E)         |                     |
| Respiratory effects on humans caused by inorganic substances (E.E) |                | DALY                |
| ECOINDICATOR 99 (E.E) | Respiratory effects on humans caused by inorganic           |                     |
| substances (E.E)                                                                    |                     |
| Damages to human health caused by climate change (E.E) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (E.E)      | DALY                |
| | Damages to human health caused by climate change (E.E)                            |                     |
| Carcinogenic effects on humans (I.I) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (I.I) | Carcinogenic effects | DALY                |
| on humans (I.I)                                                                     |                     |
| Respiratory effects on humans caused by organic substances (I.I) | ECOINDICATOR     | DALY                |
| 99 (I.I) | Respiratory effects on humans caused by organic substances (I.I)         |                     |
| Respiratory effects on humans caused by inorganic substances (I.I) | ECOINDICATOR   | DALY                |
| 99 (I.I) | Respiratory effects on humans caused by inorganic substances (I.I)       |                     |
| Damages to human health caused by climate change (I.I) | ECOINDICATOR 99 (I.I) |    | DALY                |
| Damages to human health caused by climate change (I.I)                              |                     |
| human toxicity (HTP inf) | Problem oriented approach: baseline (CML, 1999) | HTP    | kg 1,4-             |
| inf. (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                                                      | dichlorobenzene eq. |
| human toxicity (HTP20) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline (CML, 1999) | HTP  | kg 1,4-             |
| 20 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                                                        | dichlorobenzene eq. |
| human toxicity (HTP100) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline (CML, 1999) |     | kg 1,4-             |
| HTP 100 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                                                   | dichlorobenzene eq. |
| human toxicity (HTP500) | Problem oriented approach: non baseline (CML, 1999) |     | kg 1,4-             |
| HTP 500 (Huijbregts, 1999 & 2000)                                                   | dichlorobenzene eq. |
| Climate change endpoint, human health | ILCD recommended CF | Disability Adjusted   | DALY                |
| Life Years (DALY)                                                                   |                     |
| Human toxicity midpoint, cancer effects | ILCD recommended CF | Comparative Toxic   | CTUh/kg = cases     |
| Unit for human (CTUh)                                                               |                     |
| Human toxicity midpoint, non-cancer effects | ILCD recommended CF | Comparative     | CTUh = cases        |
| Toxic Unit for human (CTUh)                                                         |                     |
| Human toxicity endpoint, cancer effects | ILCD recommended CF | Disability Adjusted | DALY                |
| Life Years (DALY)                                                                   |                     |
| Human toxicity endpoint, non-cancer effects | ILCD recommended CF | Disability      | DALY                |
| Adjusted Life Years (DALY)                                                          |                     |
| Particulate matter/Respiratory inorganics midpoint | ILCD recommended CF |          | kg PM2.5-eq         |
| emission-weighed average PM2.5 equivalent                                           |                     |
| Particulate matter/Respiratory inorganics endpoint | ILCD recommended CF |          | DALY                |
| Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALY)                                               |                     |

     
 
Photochemical ozone formation midpoint, human health | ILCD recommended CF |  kg-C2H4 
Photochemical ozone creation potential (POCP)  equivalents 
Photochemical ozone formation endpoint, human health | ILCD recommended CF |  DALY 
Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALY) 
 
 
 
   
  11 

| Photochemical ozone formation midpoint, human health | ILCD recommended CF |   | kg-C2H4       |
| Photochemical ozone creation potential (POCP)                                  | equivalents   |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------|
| Photochemical ozone formation endpoint, human health | ILCD recommended CF |   | DALY          |
| Disability Adjusted Life Years (DALY)                                          |               |

     
 
Appendix 2 – Workshop slides 
 
 
 
 
 
  12 

|    |
|:---|
|    |

     
 
 
 
 
  13 

|    |
|:---|
|    |
|    |

     
 
 
 
 
  14 

|    |
|:---|
|    |
|    |

     
 
 
 
 
  15 

|    |
|:---|
|    |
|    |

     
 
 
 
 
  16 

|    |
|:---|
|    |
|    |

     
 
 
 
  17 