MULTIGRADED FUJITA APPROXIMATION
SHIN-YAO JOW
1102 naJ 4  ]GA.htam[  2v2340.5001:viXra
Abstract. The original Fujita approximation theorem states that the volume of
a big divisor D on a projective variety X can always be approximated arbitrarily
closely by the self-intersection number of an ample divisor on a birational modifi-
cation of X. One can also formulate it in terms of graded linear series as follows:
let W • = {W k} be the complete graded linear series associated to a big divisor D:
W = H0 X,O (kD) .
k X
(p)
For each fixed positive integer p, defin(cid:0)e W • to be(cid:1)the graded linear subseries of
W • generated by W p:
0, if p ∤ m;
W(p)
=
m Image SkW → W , if m = kp.
( p kp
Then the volume of W •(p) approach(cid:0)es the volume(cid:1)of W • as p → ∞. We will show
that, under this formulation, the Fujita approximation theorem can be generalized
to the case of multigraded linear series.
1. Introduction
Let X be an irreducible variety of dimension d over an algebraically closed field
K, and let D be a (Cartier) divisor on X. When X is projective, the following limit,
which measures how fast the dimension of the section space H0 X, O (mD) grows,
X
is called the volume of D:
(cid:0) (cid:1)
h0 X, O (mD)
X
vol(D) = vol (D) = lim .
X
md/d!
m→∞
(cid:0) (cid:1)
One says that D is big if vol(D) > 0. It turns out that the volume is an interesting
numerical invariant of a big divisor ([Laz04, §2.2.C]), and it plays a key role in several
recent works in birational geometry ([BDPP04], [Tsu00], [HM06], [Tak06]).
When D is ample, one can show that vol(D) = Dd, the self-intersection number of
D. This is no longer true for a general big divisor D, since Dd may even be negative.
However, it was shown by Fujita [Fuj94] that the volume of a big divisor can always be
approximated arbitrarily closely by the self-intersection number of an ample divisor
on a birational modification of X. This theorem, known as Fujita approximation, has
Date: 11 May 2010.
2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. 14C20.
Key words and phrases. Fujita approximation, multigraded linear series, Okounkov body.
1

2 SHIN-YAO JOW
several implications on the properties of volumes, and is also a crucial ingredient in
[BDPP04] (see [Laz04, §11.4] for more details).
In their recent paper [LM08], Lazarsfeld and Musta¸tˇa obtained, among other things,
a generalization of Fujita approximation to graded linear series. Recall that a graded
linear series W = {W } on a (not necessarily projective) variety X associated to a
• k
divisor D consists of finite dimensional vector subspaces
W ⊆ H0 X, O (kD)
k X
for each k ≥ 0, with W = K, such that
0 (cid:0) (cid:1)
W · W ⊆ W
k ℓ k+ℓ
for all k, ℓ ≥ 0. Here the product on the left denotes the image of W ⊗W under the
k ℓ
multiplication map H0 X, O (kD) ⊗ H0 X, O (ℓD) −→ H0 X, O ((k + ℓ)D) .
X X X
In order to state the Fujita approximation for W , they defined, for each fixed positive
•
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
(p)
integer p, a graded linear series W which is the sub graded linear series of W
• •
generated by W :
p
0, if p ∤ m;
W(p)
=
m Im SkW −→ W , if m = kp.
( p kp
Then under mild hypotheses, the(cid:0)y showed that t(cid:1)he volume of W(p) approaches the
•
volume of W as p → ∞. See [LM08, Theorem 3.5] for the precise statement, as well
•
as [LM08, Remark 3.4] for how this is equivalent to the original statement of Fujita
when X is projective and W is the complete graded linear series associated to a big
•
divisor D (i.e. W = H0 X, O (kD) for all k ≥ 0).
k X
The goal of this note is to generalize the Fujita approximation theorem to multi-
(cid:0) (cid:1)
graded linear series. We will adopt the following notations from [LM08, §4.3]: let
D , . . ., D be divisors on X. For m~ = (m , . . ., m ) ∈ Nr we write m~ D = m D ,
1 r 1 r i i
and we put |m~ | = |m |.
i
P
Definition 1. A multigraded linear series W on X associated to the D ’s consists
P ~• i
of finite-dimensional vector subspaces
0 ~
W ⊆ H X, O (kD)
~ k X
for each ~ k ∈ Nr, with W = K, such that(cid:0) (cid:1)
~
0
W · W ⊆ W ,
~ k m~ ~ k+m~
where the multiplication on the left denotes the image of W ⊗W under the natural
~ k m~
map H0 X, O (~ kD) ⊗ H0 X, O (m~ D) −→ H0 X, O ((~ k + m~ )D) .
X X X
Given(cid:0)~a ∈ Nr, de(cid:1)note by(cid:0) W the si(cid:1)ngly grad(cid:0)ed linear series as(cid:1)sociated to the
~a,•
divisor ~aD given by the subspaces W ⊆ H0 X, O (k~aD) . Then put
k~a X
vol (~a) = vol(W )
W (cid:0) ~a,• (cid:1)
~•

MULTIGRADED FUJITA APPROXIMATION 3
(assuming that this quantity is finite). It will also be convenient for us to consider
W when ~a ∈ Qr , given by
~a,• ≥0
W , if k~a ∈ Nr;
k~a
W =
~a,k
0, otherwise.
(
Our multigraded Fujita approximation, similar to the singly-graded version, is going
to state that (under suitable conditions) the volume of W can be approximated by
~•
the volume of the following finitely generated sub multigraded linear series of W :
~•
Definition 2. Given a multigraded linear series W and a positive integer p, define
~•
(p)
W to be the sub multigraded linear series of W generated by all W with |m~ | = p,
~• ~• m~ i i
or concretely
0, if p ∤ |m~ |;
W(p)
=  W · · ·W , if |m~ | = kp.
m~ m~
m~ 1 k

 |m~ |=p
 Xi
m~ +···+m~ =m~
1 k

We now state our multigraded Fujita approximation when W is a complete multi-
 ~•
graded linear series, since this is the case of most interest and allows for a more
streamlined statement. We will point out in Remark 4 afterward what assumptions
on W are actually needed in the proof.
~•
Theorem 3. Let X be an irreducible projective variety of dimension d, and let
D , . . ., D be big divisors on X. Let W be the complete multigraded linear series
1 r ~•
associated to the D ’s, namely
i
W = H0 X, O (m~ D)
m~ X
for each m~ ∈ Nr. Then given any ε > 0, there exists an integer p = p (ε) having the
(cid:0) (cid:1)
0 0
property that if p ≥ p , then
0
vol (~a)
(p)
W
(1) 1 − ~• < ε
vol (~a)
W
(cid:12) ~• (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
for all ~a ∈ Nr. (cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
Acknowledgments. The author would like to thank Robert Lazarsfeld for raising
this question during an email correspondence.
2. Proof of Theorem 3
The main tool in our proof is the theory of Okounkov bodies developed system-
atically in [LM08]. Given a graded linear series W on a d-dimensional variety X,
•
its Okounkov body ∆(W ) is a convex body in Rd that encodes many asymptotic
•
invariants of W , the most prominent one being the volume of W , which is precisely
• •

4 SHIN-YAO JOW
d! times the Euclidean volume of ∆(W ). The idea first appeared in Okounkov’s pa-
•
pers [Oko96] and [Oko03] in the case of complete linear series of ample line bundles
on a projective variety. Later it was further developed and applied to much more
general graded linear series by Lazarsfeld-Musta¸tˇa [LM08], and also independently
by Kaveh-Khovanskii [KK08, KK09].
Proof of Theorem 3. Let T = {(a , . . ., a ) ∈ Rr | a + · · · + a = 1}, and let T be
1 r ≥0 1 r Q
the set of all points in T with rational coordinates. The fraction inside (1) is invariant
under scaling of ~a due to homogeneity, hence it is enough to prove (1) for ~a ∈ T .
Q
Let ∆(W ) ⊆ Rd × Rr be the global Okounkov cone of W as in [LM08, Theo-
~• ~•
rem 4.19], and let π: ∆(W ) → Rr be the projection map. For each ~a ∈ T we write
~•
∆(W ) for the fiber π−1(~a). We also define in a similar fashion the convex cone
~• ~a
(p) (p)
∆(W ) and the convex bodies ∆(W ) . By [LM08, Theorem 4.19],
~• ~• ~a
(2) ∆(W ) = ∆(W ) for all ~a ∈ T .
~• ~a ~a,• Q
Note that although [LM08, Theorem 4.19] requires ~a to be in the relative interior of
T, here we know that (2) holds even for those ~a in the boundary of T because the
big cone of X is open and W was assumed to be the complete multigraded linear
~•
series. By the singly-graded Fujita approximation, vol(W ) can be approximated
~a,•
(p) (p) (p)
arbitrarily closely by vol(W ) if p is sufficiently large. (Here by W we mean W
~a,• ~a,• ~•
restricted to the ~a direction, which certainly contains (W )(p).) Hence given any
~a,•
finite subset S ⊂ T and any ε′ > 0, we have
Q
vol ∆(W(p) ) ≥ vol ∆(W ) − ε′ for all ~a ∈ S
~• ~a ~• ~a
as soon as p is suffici(cid:0)ently large(cid:1). (cid:0) (cid:1)
Because the function ~a 7→ vol ∆(W ) is uniformly continuous on T, given any
~• ~a
ε′ > 0, we can partition T into a union of polytopes with disjoint interiors T = T ,
i
(cid:0) (cid:1)
in such a way that the vertices of each T all have rational coordinates, and on each
i
S
T we have a constant M such that
i i
(3) M ≤ vol ∆(W ) ≤ M + ε′ for all ~a ∈ T .
i ~• ~a i i
Let S be the set of vertices o(cid:0)f all the T(cid:1) ’s. Then as we saw in the end of the previous
i
paragraph, as soon as p is sufficiently large we have
(4) vol ∆(W(p) ) ≥ vol ∆(W ) − ε′ for all ~a ∈ S.
~• ~a ~• ~a
We claim that this im(cid:0) plies (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
(5) vol ∆(W(p) ) ≥ vol ∆(W ) − 2ε′ for all ~a ∈ T .
~• ~a ~• ~a Q
To show this, it suffi(cid:0)ces to ver(cid:1)ify it o(cid:0)n each of(cid:1)the T ’s. Let ~v , . . .,~v be the vertices
i 1 k
of T . Then each ~a ∈ T can be written as a convex combination of the vertices:
i i

MULTIGRADED FUJITA APPROXIMATION 5
(p)
~a = t ~v where each t ≥ 0 and t = 1. Since ∆(W ) is convex, we have
j j j j ~•
(p) (p)
P ∆(W P) ⊇ t ∆(W ) ,
~• ~a j ~• ~v j
X
where the sum on the right means the Minkowski sum. By (3) and (4), the volume of
∆(W(p)
each ) is at least M − ε′, hence by the Brunn-Minkowski inequality [KK08,
~• ~v j i
Theorem 5.4], we have
(p) ′
vol ∆(W ) ≥ M − ε for all ~a ∈ T ∩ T .
~• ~a i i Q
This combined with (3) shows that (5) is true on T ∩ T , hence it is true on T since
(cid:0) (cid:1)
i Q Q
the T ’s cover T.
i
Since (1) follows from (5) by choosing a suitable ε′, the proof is thus complete. (cid:3)
Remark 4. In the statement of Theorem 3 we assume that W is the complete
~•
multigraded linear series associated to big divisors. But in fact since the main tool
we used in the proof is the theory of Okounkov bodies established in [LM08], in
particular [LM08, Theorem 4.19], the really indispensable assumptions on W are
~•
the same as those in [LM08] (which they called Conditions (A′) and (B′), or (C′)).
The only place in the proof where we invoke that we are working with a complete
multigraded linear series is the sentence right after (2), where we want to say that (2)
holds not only in the relative interior of T but also in its boundary. Hence if W is only
~•
assumed to satisfy Conditions (A′) and (B′), or (C′), then given any ε > 0 and any
compact set C contained in T ∩ int supp(W ) , there exists an integer p = p (C, ε)
~• 0 0
such that if p ≥ p then
0
(cid:0) (cid:1)
vol (~a) > vol (~a) − ε
W(p) W
~•
~•
for all ~a ∈ C ∩ T .
Q
References
[BDPP04] S´ebastien Boucksom, Jean-Pierre Demailly, Mihai Paun, and Thomas Peternell, The
pseudo-effective cone of a compact K¨ahler manifold and varieties of negative Kodaira
dimension, preprint, arXiv:math/0405285
[Fuj94] Takao Fujita, Approximating Zariski decomposition of big line bundles, Kodai Math. J.
17
(1994), no. 1, 1–3.
[HM06] Christopher Hacon and James McKernan, Boundedness of pluricanonical maps of vari-
eties of general type, Invent. Math. 166 (2006), 1–25.
[KK08] Kiumars Kaveh and Askold Khovanskii, Convex bodies and algebraic equations on affine
varieties, preprint, arXiv:0804.4095
[KK09] Kiumars Kaveh and Askold Khovanskii, Newton convex bodies, semigroups of integral
points, graded algebras and intersection theory, preprint, arXiv:0904.3350
[Laz04] Robert Lazarsfeld, Positivity in Algebraic Geometry I–II, Ergeb. Math. Grenzgeb.,
48 49
vols. – , Berlin: Springer, 2004.
[LM08] Robert Lazarsfeld and Mircea Musta¸tˇa, Convex bodies associated to linear series, to
appear in Ann. Sci. Ecole Norm. Sup., arXiv:0805.4559

6 SHIN-YAO JOW
[Oko96] Andrei Okounkov, Brunn-Minkowski inequality for multiplicities, Invent. Math. 125
(1996), 405–411.
[Oko03] Andrei Okounkov, Why would multiplicities be log-concave?, The orbit method in geom-
etry and physics, Progress in Mathematics vol. 213, Boston, MA: Birkh¨auser Boston,
2003, pp. 329–347.
[Tak06] Shigeharu Takayama, Pluricanonical systems on algebraic varieties of general type, In-
165
vent. Math. (2006), 551–587.
[Tsu00] Hajime Tsuji, Effective birationality of pluricanonical systems, preprint,
arXiv:math/0011257
Department of Mathematics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104
E-mail address: jows@math.upenn.edu