2 3
Identities of the Function f(x, y) = x + y
Roger Tian
9002 tcO 8  ]MG.htam[  1v1751.0190:viXra
June 12, 2018
Abstract
2 3
Harvey Friedman asked in 1986 whether the function f(x,y) = x + y on the
R2
real plane satisfies any identities; examples of identities are commutativity and
associativity. To solve this problem of Friedman, we must either find a nontrivial
identity involving expressions formed by recursively applying f to a set of variables
x ,x ,...,x that holds in the real numbers or to prove that no such identities
1 2 n
{ }
hold. In this paper, we will solve certain special cases of Friedman’s problem and
explore the connection between this problem and certain Diophantine equations.
Acknowledgements
I would like to thank my thesis advisor, George Bergman, for introducing Lemma
2 to me, shortening the proofs of several of the results below, pointing out areas
of the paper that needed clarification, and giving advice on how to better organize
this thesis.
Notice that, given any identity in any number of variables, one can get an identity
in one variable x by replacing all the variables of the given identity by x. The single
variable case of Friedman’s problem, whether or not there exists a nontrivial identity
that holds in the real numbers involving expressions formed by recursively applying f
to the variable set x , may be easier to treat than the general problem of multiple
{ }
variables.
A priori, proving that no nontrivial identity of one variable holds does not com-
pletely solve the general problem, because two expressions, if equal as polynomi-
als, that have the same “structure” regarding the composition of f’s (ignoring the
variables involved) lead to the trivial identity when all the variables are replaced
by x. For instance, f(f(x,y),f(y,x)) = f(f(y,x),f(x,y)) as polynomials implies
f(f(x,x),f(x,x)) = f(f(x,x),f(x,x)) as polynomials. However, proving that no non-
trivial identity of one variable holds would tell us that two expressions can be equal
as polynomials only if they have the same structure. For instance, since f(x,f(x,x))
and f(f(x,f(x,x)),x) are not equal as polynomials, we know that f(x,f(y,z)) and
f(f(x,f(y,z)),y) cannot be equal as polynomials. We will use this observation to
prove in Lemma 2 that a nontrivial multiple-variable identity holds only if a nontrivial
1-variable identity holds.
N
We will follow the convention that 0 / .
∈
1

Notation 1. Suppose G(x ,x ,...,x ) is an expression formed by recursively apply-
1 2 n
ing f to the variable set x ,x ,...,x . We shall call an occurrence of a variable
1 2 n
{ }
in G(x ,x ,...,x ) a variable position. Supposing that G(x ,x ,...,x ) contains
1 2 n 1 2 n
N
l variable positions where l , we will proceed from left to right and label these
∈
successive variable positions as v , v , ..., v , and for all i = 1,2,... ,l we will de-
1 2 l
note by v¯ the variable in x ,x ,... ,x occurring in the variable position v . We
i 1 2 n i
{ }
define the depth of a variable position v occurring in an f-expression f(A,B) to
be one more than its depth in A or B (whichever v occurs in), where we start by
defining the depth of the bare expression x where i 1,2,... ,n to be 0; we will
i
∈ { }
denote the depth of v by depth(v). For example, the variable positions v , v , v of
1 2 3
f(x,f(y,x)) hold the variables v¯ = x, v¯ = y, and v¯ = x, while we have depth(v ) = 1,
1 2 3 1
depth(v ) = 2 and depth(v ) = 2. We can associate to G(x ,x ,... ,x ) the l-tuple
2 3 1 2 n
((v¯ ,depth(v )),(v¯ ,depth(v )),... ,(v¯,depth(v ))). It is clear that G(x ,x ,... ,x )
1 1 2 2 l l 1 2 n
completely determines ((v¯ ,depth(v )),(v¯ ,depth(v )),... ,(v¯,depth(v ))).
1 1 2 2 l l
The following result was pointed out to the author by George Bergman, and its
proof follows the ideas outlined by Bergman. This lemma establishes that, to answer
Friedman’s problem in the negative, it suffices to prove that no nontrivial identity of
one variable holds.
Lemma 2. Suppose that f satisfies no nontrivial 1-variable identities in R . Let n be
a positive integer and let x ,x ,... ,x be a set of variables. Then f satisfies no
1 2 n
{ }
R
nontrivial identities involving the variables x , x , ..., x in .
1 2 n
Proof. Suppose that two distinct expressions G(x ,x ,...,x ), H(x ,x ,... ,x )
1 2 n 1 2 n
formed by recursively applying f to x ,x ,...,x are equal as polynomials. It follows
1 2 n
{ }
that G(x,x,... ,x) and H(x,x,... ,x) are equal as polynomials. Then, by the assump-
tion of no nontrivial 1-variable identities, G(x,x,... ,x) and H(x,x,... ,x) must be the
same expression, so G(x ,x ,... ,x ) and H(x ,x ,... ,x ) must have the same number
1 2 n 1 2 n
of variable positions. We will label the variable positions of G(x ,x ,...,x ) by v , v ,
1 2 n 1 2
′ ′ ′
..., v and the variable positions of H(x ,x ,...,x ) by v , v , ..., v , where l is some
l 1 2 n 1 2 l
positive integer. Now, G(x ,x ,...,x ) determines the l-tuple
1 2 n
((v¯ ,depth(v )),(v¯ ,depth(v )),... ,(v¯,depth(v )))
1 1 2 2 l l
and H(x ,x ,... ,x ) determines the l-tuple
1 2 n
¯′ ′ ¯′ ′ ¯′ ′
((v ,depth(v )),(v ,depth(v )),... ,(v ,depth(v ))).
1 1 2 2 l l
′
We know that for each i = 1,2,... ,l we have depth(v ) = depth(v ), i.e. corresponding
i i
variable positions have the same depth. Let j be the smallest positive integer such that
¯′
v¯ = x = x = v where k = m. Now replace x in G(x ,x ,... ,x ), H(x ,x ,... ,x )
j k m j k 1 2 n 1 2 n
6 6
by f(x,x) and replace x in G(x ,x ,... ,x ), H(x ,x ,... ,x ) by x for each i = k,
i 1 2 n 1 2 n
6
N
and we obtain a 1-variable identity. Then there exists at least one p j in such that
≥
the pth variable position of the 1-variable expression resulting from G(x ,x ,... ,x )
1 2 n
has a depth one greater than that of the pth variable position of the 1-variable expres-
sion resulting from H(x ,x ,... ,x ). Therefore, the two 1-variable expressions in the
1 2 n
identity are distinct, which is a contradiction.
2

The proof of Lemma 2 leaves open a more difficult question, as the statement of
Lemma 2 is weaker than what we state in the following
Conjecture 3. Suppose that G(x) is an expression formed by recursively applying f to
the variable set x and that G(x) has the variable positions v , v , ..., v for some
1 2 l
{ }
positive integer l. Let n be a positive integer and x ,x ,... ,x be a set of variables.
1 2 n
{ }
Let G(x ,x ,... ,x ) be an n-variable expression obtained by letting v¯ x ,x ,...,x
1 2 n i 1 2 n
∈ { }
for all i = 1,2,... ,l. If G(x) cannot occur as either side of a nontrivial 1-variable
identity, then G(x ,x ,... ,x ) cannot occur as either side of a nontrivial n-variable
1 2 n
identity.
Below, we prove some results on the single variable case of Friedman’s problem.
They show that certain classes of expressions cannot occur as either side of a nontrivial
identity.
Definition 4. If p(x) = Pn a xk is a polynomial where m n are nonnegative
k=m k
≤
integers and where a , a are nonzero, then m will be called the order of p(x), and n
m n
will be called the degree of p(x).
In what follows, by an f-expression we will, unless otherwise specified, always
mean a symbolic expression in f and x that is formed by recursively applying f to the
variable set x ; we also consider x itself an f-expression. We will denote the set of all
{ }
Z
f-expressions by term(f;x). Let e : term(f;x) [x] be the evaluation map that
−→
Z
assigns to each f-expression its corresponding polynomial in [x]. We say that e(A)
is the polynomial induced by the f-expression A. For example, e(f(x,f(x,x))) =
x2 + (x2 + x3)3. If A and B are two f-expressions and e(A) = e(B), then we say
that A and B are e-equivalent. We shall call an f-expression e-isolated if it is
not e-equivalent to any other f-expression, i.e. it cannot occur as either side of a
nontrivial identity. For example, f(x,x) is e-isolated because, as it is not hard to see,
e(f(A ,A )) = e(f(x,x)), where A , A are f-expressions, implies A = x and A = x.
1 2 1 2 1 2
Notation 5. Let A term(f;x). For brevity, we will denote the degree of e(A) by
∈
dege(A) and the order of e(A) by orde(A). For the degree and order of any polynomial
p(x) that is not written as the induced polynomial of some B term(f;x), we retain the
∈
standard notation deg(p(x)) and ord(p(x)) respectively. For example, we would denote
the degree of p(x) = x2 + x3 as deg(p(x)) if we did not explicitly state or did not know
beforehand that p(x) = e(f(x,x)).
In the next three propositions, let A,B term(f;x).
∈
Proposition 6. If e(f(C ,C )) = e(f(x,B)) where C , C are f-expressions, then we
1 2 1 2
must have C = x and e(C ) = e(B).
1 2
Proof. We have e(f(x,B)) = x2 +e(B)3 = e(C )2 +e(C )3. Notice that 3orde(C ) 3,
1 2 2
≥
so x2 must arise in the expansion of e(C )2. This forces C = x, because otherwise
1 1
every term that arises in the expansion of e(C )2 will have powers at least as high as 4.
1
Then cancellation gives us e(C )3 = e(B)3, which forces e(C ) = e(B).
2 2
3

Proposition 7. If e(f(C ,C )) = e(f(A,x)) where C , C are f-expressions, then we
1 2 1 2
must have e(C ) = e(A) and C = x.
1 2
Proof. We have e(f(A,x)) = e(A)2+x3 = e(C )2+e(C )3. If C = x, then e(C )2 = x2.
1 2 1 1
If C = x, then orde(C ) 2, so e(C )2 has order at least 4. Thus, x3 must arise in the
1 1 1
6 ≥
expansion of e(C )3. Therefore, we have C = x and it follows from cancellation that
2 2
e(C )2 = e(A)2, so e(C ) = e(A).
1 1
Remark 8. Actually, the arguments in the proofs of the previous two propositions also
apply if f(x,B) in Proposition 6 and f(A,x) in Proposition 7 are instead multiple-
variable f-expressions. For example, the same arguments can be applied, repeatedly, to
show that f-expressions such as f(f(x,f(y,z)),y) are e-isolated. In effect, this settles
a special case of Conjecture 3.
Proposition 9. If e(f(C ,C )) = e(f(f(x,x),B)) where C , C are f-expressions,
1 2 1 2
then we must have C = f(x,x) and e(C ) = e(B).
1 2
Proof. We have e(C )2 + e(C )3 = e(f(x,x))2 + e(B)3 = (x2 + x3)2 + e(B)3 = x4 +
1 2
2x5 +x6 +e(B)3. If B = x, then the conclusion follows by Proposition 7. Suppose B is
not x. Notice that the terms x4 and 2x5 must arise in the expansion of e(C )2 because
1
3orde(C ) 6 as C = x. Since x4 = x2 x2, we must have e(C ) = e(f(x,C )) = x2 +
2 2 1 3
≥ 6 ·
e(C )3 where C is another f-expression. Considering (x2 + e(C )3)2 and the fact that
3 3 3
x5 = x2 x3 show that the expansion of e(C )3 contains the term x3, so e(C )3 = x3 and
3 3
·
thus C = x. Since e(C ) = x2+x3, it follows again by cancellation that e(C )3 = e(B)3
3 1 2
and so e(C ) = e(B). Since f(x,x) is e-isolated, we have C = f(x,x).
2 1
As can be seen, the above three propositions were established with an argument that
works “outside-in” in the sense that it depends only on the x and f(x,x) that are being
appended to A, B by f, while A and B can be completely arbitrary. This argument is
difficult to apply for f-expressions such as f(C,B), where B is arbitrary and C is an
f-expression such that dege(C) > dege(f(x,x)). Below we will introduce an argument
that works, in some sense, “inside-out.”
Let f(A,B) be an f-expression. We will be examining the leading terms of the
polynomial e(f(A,B)) by looking at the subexpressions from which they arise. For
instance, e(f(x,f(x,x))) = x2 + e(f(x,x))3 = x2 +(x2 +x3)3 and we see that the term
with the degree of the polynomial arises from the f(x,x) by the product (x3)3 = x9.
The next lemma will show that the fact that this highest degree term arises from a
subexpression f(x,x) is very generally true.
Lemma 10. Every summand contributing to the highest degree term of e(f(A,B)) must
arise from an occurrence of f(x,x) contained in f(A,B), on expanding e(f(A,B)) in
powers of x.
Proof. Consider the polynomial expansion of e(f(A,B)). Suppose dege(f(A,B)) =
2m 3n N px2m3n
for some m,n 0 . Then the highest degree term of e(f(A,B)) is for
∈ ∪{ }
N
some p . Let x denote an occurrence of x in f(A,B) such that at least one of the
d
∈
4

x2m3n [x2m3n
p copies of (we will denote this copy by ] ) in the expansion of e(f(A,B))
α
contains at least one factor of this occurrence of x, i.e. [x2m3n ] = x2 x2m3n−2 or
α d
·
[x2m3n ] = x3 x2m3n−3. Suppose that x is contained in a subexpression f(x ,C) or
α d d d
·
f(D,x ) where C = x and D = x. Considering the product e(C)3 x2m3n−2 that arises
d
6 6 ·
from f(x ,C) and the product e(D)2 x2m3n−3 that arises from f(D,x ), we see that in
d d
·
the expansion of e(f(A,B)) any occurrence of x contained in C or in D will lead to a
m n
term with a power higher than 2 3 . This is a contradiction, so x must be contained
d
in an f(x,x ) in f(A,B).
d
We will call an occurrence of f(x,x) in the f-expression f(A,B) a core of f(A,B)
if this occurrence of f(x,x) gives rise to a summand contributing to the highest degree
′
term of e(f(A,B)). Whenever an occurrence f(x,x) of f(x,x) in f(A,B) is a core of
f(A,B), it is clear that e(f(x,x)′ )1dege(f(A,B)) = (x2 + x3)1dege(f(A,B)) must be a term
3 3
of e(f(A,B)).
We define inductively what it means to develop an f-expression about a core:
1. Start with f(x,x) and label it a core of the f-expression to be developed. Then
f(x,x) is the f-expression at the first stage of the development.
2. Let A be the f-expression at the nth stage of the development where n 1. Then
≥
the f-expression at the (n+1)st stage of the development is either f(A,C) where
C is an f-expression such that 3dege(C) 2dege(A) or f(C,A) where C is an
≤
f-expression such that 2dege(C) 3dege(A).
≤
Any f-expression can be developed inductively in the above manner, though the de-
velopment may not be unique. For example, we can develop f(x,f(x,x)) only by the se-
quence of steps f(x,x), f(x,f(x,x)) while we can develop f(f(x,f(x,x)),f(f(x,x),x))
by the sequence f(x,x), f(x,f(x,x)), f(f(x,f(x,x)),f(f(x,x),x)) or by the sequence
f(x,x), f(f(x,x),x), f(f(x,f(x,x)),f(f(x,x),x)). However, every development of an
m n
f-expression whose induced polynomial has degree 2 3 must consist of m + n stages.
Suppose that C and C are distinct cores of the f-expression A. Then we can find a
1 2
subexpression f(D ,D ) of A such that either D contains C and D contains C or vice
1 2 1 1 2 2
versa. Since C , C are both cores, we must have D = D and 2dege(D ) = 3dege(D ).
1 2 1 2 1 2
6
Since f(D ,D ) is the f-expression at the nth stage of the development of A about C
1 2 1
N
and the f-expression at the nth stage of the development of A about C for some n ,
2
∈
we see that the development of A about C and the development of A about C differ at
1 2
the (n 1)st stage, i.e. these two developments are distinct. This analysis shows that
−
an f-expression has a unique core whenever it has a unique development. Therefore,
an f-expression has a unique development if and only if this f-expression has a unique
core. Note that a “development” is defined as a property of an f-expression, not of
a polynomial. So far as we know, for a given f-expression, the properties of having a
unique core and of being e-isolated are independent of one another.
It is easy to see that an f-expression corresponding to a non-monic polynomial
does not have a unique core. However, the number of cores of an f-expression
do not necessarily equal the leading coefficient of the induced polynomial; consider
5

f(x,f(f(x,f(x,x)),f(f(x,x),x))), which has two cores while the polynomial it induces
has a leading coefficient of 8. Moreover, it is easy to prove by induction the following
Lemma 11. Suppose A term(f;x) and e(A) is non-monic. Then we have dege(A) =
∈
2p 3q where p 1 and q 2.
≥ ≥
Proof. Let A = f(B,C). If 2dege(B) = 3dege(C), then neither B nor C is x, so the
value of dege(f(B,C)) = 2dege(B) = 3dege(C) will be divisible by 2 and 32, the latter
because dege(C) is divisible by 3. If 2dege(B) = 3dege(C), then whichever of B or C
6
contributes the higher degree term must be non-monic, and in that case we may assume
inductively that either dege(B) or dege(C) satisfies the conclusion of the lemma.
We shall call an f-expression f(A,B) disjoint if 2dege(A) < 3orde(B) or if
3dege(B) < 2orde(A). f(A,B) is called hereditarily disjoint if it is disjoint at
every stage of its development about some core. We also consider x to be (vacuously)
hereditarily disjoint.
Proposition 12. An f-expression A is hereditarily disjoint if and only if it is either
1. x
2. f(x,U) for U a hereditarily disjoint f-expression
3. f(U,x) for U a hereditarily disjoint f-expression with orde(U) 2
≥
4. f(f(x,x),U) for U a hereditarily disjoint f-expression with orde(U) 3
≥
In these four cases, orde(A) = 1, 2, 3, 4 respectively, and it is easy to see that A has a
unique core in all cases except A = x.
Proof. If A belongs to one of the above four cases, then A is hereditarily disjoint by
definition. Now assume that A is hereditarily disjoint, we will show that A belongs to
one of the above four cases. Suppose that A = x and that for each core there are n
6
stages in the development of A about that core. Suppose that for all i n 1 the
≤ −
f-expression at the ith stage of the development of A about each of its cores belongs
to one of the above four cases. Then either A = f(B,C) where 3orde(C) > 2dege(B)
or A = f(C,B) where 2orde(C) > 3dege(B). By the inductive hypothesis, we have
orde(C) 4, which forces dege(B) < 6 for the case A = f(B,C) and dege(B) < 3
≤
for the case A = f(C,B). Thus, A = f(B,C) implies B = f(x,x) or B = x, and
A = f(C,B) implies B = x. This completes the induction.
Notation 13. Let A,B term(f;x). Whenever we denote A by f(...B ...), we mean
∈
that B is a subexpression of A and B contains a core of A.
p q
Suppose A := f(...f(C,B)...) is an f-expression of degree 2 3 where B contains
a core of A. Suppose 3dege(B) = 2m 3n and 2dege(C) = 2i 3j . Define the degree-gap
between C and B to be the positive integer
m n i j
dgap(C,B) := 3dege(B) 2dege(C) = 2 3 2 3 . (1)
− −
6

In the dgap( , ) notation we use, we will ignore the order of B and C. In other words,
− −
m n i j
we could also have written (1) as “dgap(B,C) := 3dege(B) 2dege(C) = 2 3 2 3 ”
− −
(as we have already specified that B contains a core of A). Now consider the expansion
(e(C)2+e(B)3)2p−m3q−n
of and notice that the highest degree monomial which can
contain a factor coming from C in the expansion of e(A) is
2i3j 2m3n 2p−m3q−n−1 2i3j+(2m3n)(2p−m3q−n−1)
maxt (C) = x (x ) = x ; (2)
A
·
x2i3j+(2m3n)(2p−m3q−n−1),
here we are ignoring the coefficient of as it is irrelevant at this
point. The definition in (2) is relative to A given, but we will abbreviate maxt (C) to
A
maxt(C) where there is no danger of confusion. Of course, B gives rise to the highest
x2p3q xdege(A)
degree monomial = of A. Notice that
2p−m3q−n
3
dege(A) deg(maxt(C)) = deg((e(B) ) ) deg(maxt(C))
− −
p q i j m n p−m q−n
= 2 3 (2 3 + (2 3 )(2 3 1))
− −
m n i j
= 2 3 2 3
−
= dgap(C,B),
so the degree-gap between C and B is preserved in the expansion of e(A). This
(and its analogue in the next paragraph) will be an important fact in Lemma 17 and
Proposition 22, where we will prove that an f-expression is e-isolated by considering all
possible developments that lead to an f-expression e-equivalent to the given one.
Similarly, in the opposite case, where B := f(...f(A,D)...) is an f-expression of
p q m n i j
degree 2 3 , A contains a core of B, 2dege(A) = 2 3 , and 3dege(D) = 2 3 , we can
define the degree-gap between A and D to be the positive integer
dgap(A,D) := 2dege(A) 3dege(D) (3)
−
and notice that the highest degree monomial which can contain a factor coming
from D in the expansion of e(B) is
2i3j+(2m3n)(2p−m3q−n−1)
maxt (D) = x . (4)
B
Again, we will ignore the order of A and D in the dgap( , ) notation we use, and we
− −
will abbreviate maxt (D) to maxt(D) where there is no danger of confusion. As before,
B
we can observe that
dege(B) deg(maxt(D)) = dgap(A,D).
−
2m 3n−1,
For an f-expression A := f(...B ...) where deg(e(B)) = we say that
B is e-isolated with respect to A if, for every development of every f-expression
e-equivalent to A, we obtain the f-expression B (not merely some f-expression e-
equivalent to B) at the (m + (n 1))st stage of the development. Note that if B is
−
e-isolated with respect to A, then B must be e-isolated. The converse is not true,
because even though f(x,f(x,x)) is e-isolated, it is not e-isolated with respect to
f(f(x,f(x,x)),f(f(x,x),x)). Thus, B being e-isolated with respect to A is a stronger
statement than B being e-isolated. Note also that Lemma 10 is equivalent to the state-
ment that f(x,x) is e-isolated with respect to every f-expression other than x.
7

Definition 14. Let A term(f;x) and let D (A), D (A) denote two developments of
1 2
∈
A, not necessarily distinct. We shall say that D (A), D (A) agree at the nth stage
1 2
ˆ ˆ
if there exists A term(f;x) such that A is the f-expression at the nth stage of both
∈
D (A) and D (A).
1 2
Notation 15. Given A term(f;x), we will write A[n] for the f-expression at the nth
∈
stage of the development of A, provided that all developments of A agree at the nth
stage. Note that this notation refers only to developments of A, and not to developments
of f-expressions e-equivalent to A, in contrast to the definition of “e-isolated with respect
to A” in the paragraph preceding Definition 14.
Definition 16. Let p(x) = a nxn + a n−1xn−1 + ... + a 1x + a and q(x) = b nxn +
0
n−1xn−1
b + ... + b 1x + b be two polynomials with nonnegative coefficients. Suppose
0
p(x) = q(x), and let m be the greatest integer such that a = b . Then we say that
m m
6 6
p(x) is lexicographically greater than q(x), denoted by p(x) > q(x), if a > b .
L m m
′ ′
Lemma 17. Let A = f(...f(x ,B)...) be an f-expression where x := x for the purpose
of distinguishing it from the other occurrences of the variable x in A, dege(A) = 2p 3q,
and B contains a core of A. Suppose that for every f-expression C in the ellipses (...) of
′
A we have deg(maxt(C)) deg(maxt(x )). Suppose there exists either an f-expression
≤
A¯ = f(...f(U,B)...) such that dege(A¯ ) = 2p 3q, U = x, and B contains a core of A¯ or
6
an f-expression Aˆ = f(...f(B,V )...) such that dege(Aˆ ) = 2p 3q and B contains a core
ˆ ¯ ¯ ˆ ˆ
of A. Then e(A) < e(A) if A exists and e(A) < e(A) if A exists.
L L
Proof. By our assumption, the subexpressions in the ellipses of A give rise to terms
with powers no higher than that of maxt(x′ ). Suppose e(B)3 is of degree 2m 3n .
(e(B)3)2p−m3q−n (e(B)2)2p−m−13q−n+1
Notice that = is common to both e(A) and
¯ ¯ ˆ ˆ
e(A) (if A exists), and is common to both e(A) and e(A) (if A exists). We
(e(B)3)2p−m3q−n deg(maxt(x′ deg(e(A¯ (e(B)3)2p−m3q−n
have deg(e(A) ) = )), ) )
− deg(e(Aˆ (e(B)2)2p−m−13q−n+1 deg(max− x≥
deg(maxt(U)), and ) ) t(V )). Since U = ,
deg(− maxt(x′ ≥ (e(B)3)2p−m3q−n deg(e(A6 ¯
we have deg(maxt(U)) > )), so deg(e(A) ) < )
(e(B)3)2p−m3q−n e(A¯ th− A¯ desired−
). It follows that e(A) < ) (in e case that exists) as .
L
dgap(x′ 2m 3n 2m+13n−1 2m+13n−1
Since ,B) = 2 > 3 3dege(V ) = dgap(B,V ),
− − ≥ −
′ p q ′ p q
we have deg(maxt(x )) = 2 3 dgap(x ,B) < 2 3 dgap(B,V ) = deg(maxt(V )),
(e(B)3)2p−m3q−n )− deg(e(Aˆ (e(B)2− )2p−m−13q−n+1
so deg(e(A) < ) ). It follows that
− −
ˆ ˆ
e(A) < e(A) (in the case that A exists) as desired.
L
′ ′
Lemma 18. Let A = f(...f(B,x )...) be an f-expression such that x := x, dege(A) =
2p 3q, and B contains a core of A. Suppose A¯ = f(...f(B,U)...) is an f-expression
such that U = x, dege(A¯ ) = 2p 3q, and B contains a core of A¯ . Suppose that for every
6
′
f-expression C in the ellipses (...) of A we have deg(maxt(C)) deg(maxt(x )). Then
≤
¯
e(A) < e(A).
L
Proof. By our assumption, the subexpressions in the ellipses of A give rise to terms
with powers no higher than that of maxt(x′ ). Suppose e(B)2 is of degree 2m 3n . No-
(e(B)2)2p−m3q−n e(A¯
tice that is common to both e(A) and ). We have deg(e(A)
−
8

(e(B)2)2p−m3q−n deg(maxt(x′ deg(e(A¯ (e(B)2)2p−m3q−n
) = )) and ) ) deg(maxt(U)).
deg(maxt(x− ′ deg(e(A¯ (e≥ (B)2)2p−m3q−n
Since U = x, we have deg(maxt(U)) > )), so ) ) >
deg(e(A)6 (e(B)2)2p−m3q−n e(A¯ desi−
). It follows that e(A) < ) as red.
L
−
(1)
Lemma 19. Let U term(f;x) where U = x. Let B = f(x ,U) where x :=
U 1 1
∈ 6
(n+1) (n)
x. For every positive integer n, let B = f(x ,B ), where x := x. Let
U n+1 U n+1
(n) N
A = f(...B ...) where n . Then deg(maxt(x )) > deg(maxt(x )) > ... >
U 1 2
∈
deg(maxt(x )).
n
(n)
Proof. Since B contains a core of A, U must contain a core of A. No-
U
(1) (n−1)
tice that dgap(x ,U) < dgap(x ,B ) < ... < dgap(x ,B ). Since
1 2 U n U
(1)
deg(maxt(x )) = dege(A) dgap(x ,U), deg(maxt(x )) = deg(A) dgap(x ,B ),
1 1 2 2 U
− −
(n−1)
..., and deg(maxt(x )) = dege(A) dgap(x ,B ), the conclusion immediately fol-
n n U
−
lows.
Analogously, we have the following
(1)
Lemma 20. Let V term(f;x) where V = x. Let C = f(V,x ) where x :=
V 1 1
∈ 6
(n+1) (n)
x. For every positive integer n, let C = f(C ,x ), where x := x. Let
V V n+1 n+1
(n) N
A = f(...C ...) where n . Then deg(maxt(x )) > deg(maxt(x )) > ... >
V 1 2
∈
deg(maxt(x )).
n
Lemma 21. Let A = f(...f(f(x ,B),x )...) be an f-expression such that x := x,
1 2 1
x := x and B = x. Then deg(maxt(x )) > deg(maxt(x )).
2 1 2
6
Proof. Notice that B must contain a core of A. We have dgap(x ,B) = 3dege(B) 2 <
1
−
6dege(B) 3 = dgap(f(x ,B),x ). Since deg(maxt(x )) = dege(A) dgap(x ,B) and
1 2 1 1
− −
deg(maxt(x )) = dege(A) dgap(f(x ,B),x ), the conclusion immediately follows.
2 1 2
−
′ ′
Proposition 22. Let A = f(...f(x ,B)...) be an f-expression such that x := x.
Suppose that for every f-expression C in the ellipses (...) of A we have deg(maxt(C))
≤
′ ′
deg(maxt(x )). Suppose that B is e-isolated with respect to A. Then f(x ,B) is e-
isolated with respect to A.
Proof. Suppose 3dege(B) = 2m 3n . Let A′ be an f-expression e-equivalent to A. Then
A′[m+(n−1)]
= B by our assumption, so the (m + n)th stage of every development
′
of A is either f(U,B) or f(B,V ) for some U,V term(f;x). Suppose that either
∈
′ ′
A = f(...f(U,B)...) where U = x or A = f(...f(B,V )...). By Lemma 17 we have
6
′
e(A) < e(A ), which is a contradiction. It follows that the (m + n)th stage of every
L
A′ A′[m+n]
development of must be of the form f(U,B) where U = x. Hence = f(x,B)
as desired.
Notation 23. Let B(1) = f(x,x). For every positive integer n, let B(n+1) = f(x,B(n)).
Also, we let B(0) = x.
9

Notation 23 is to be used for the remainder of this paper, and is not to be confused
with the ad hoc notations set up in Lemma 19 and Lemma 20.
Corollary 24. Let A = f(...f(x′ ,B(m))...) be an f-expression where x′ := x. Sup-
pose that for every f-expression C in the ellipses (...) of A we have deg(maxt(C))
deg(maxt(x′ )). Then f(x′ ,B(m)) is e-isolated with respect to A. ≤
Proof. We know that B(1) = f(x,x) is e-isolated with respect to A. Suppose we
B(k)
know that is e-isolated with respect to A for some 1 k m. Writing A as
≤ ≤
f(...f(x′′ ,B(k))...) x′′
where := x, we see by Lemma 19 that for every f-expression
f(...f(x′′ ,B(k))...) deg(maxt(x′′
D in the ellipses of we have deg(maxt(D)) )). It
≤
f(x′′ ,B(k))
then follows by Proposition 22 that is e-isolated with respect to A. This
completes the induction.
Lemma 25. Let A = f(...f(x′ ,B(m))...) be an f-expression where x′ := x. Let
A¯ = f(...C ...) be an f-expression such that dege(A¯ ) = dege(A), C = f(x′ ,B(m)), and
6
dege(C) = dege(f(x′ ,B(m))). Suppose that for every f-expression D in the ellipses of
′ ¯
A we have deg(maxt(D)) deg(maxt(x )). Then e(A) < e(A).
L
≤
Proof. C has a unique core by Lemma 11. Since C = f(x′ ,B(m)) and dege(C) =
6
dege(f(x′ ,B(m))), N C[k+1] f(U,B(k))
we can find some k m in such that = where
A¯ f(...f(U≤ ,B(k))...). f(x′ ,B(m))[k+1] f(x′′ ,B(k))
U = x. Then we can write as Since =
6
x′′ f(...f(x′′ ,B(k))...).
where := x, we can write A as We see by Lemma 19 that for
f(...f(x′′ ,B(k))...)
every f-expression E in the ellipses of we have deg(maxt(E))
≤
′′ ¯
deg(maxt(x )). It follows by Lemma 17 that e(A) < e(A).
L
Lexicographic ordering on polynomials with nonnegative integer coefficients is a
m n
well-ordering. In particular, for all m and n the set of all polynomials of degree 2 3
induced by f-expressions contains exactly one lexicographically minimal polynomial,
and we will see that this polynomial corresponds to an e-isolated f-expression.
As an illustration, we claim that the f-expression f(f(f(x,f(x,x)),x),x) leads to
the lexicographically minimal polynomial with degree 36 = (22)(32). The following
lemma gives the general rule.
Lemma 26. For any A term(f;x), let u(A) = f(x,A) and v(A) = f(A,x). The
∈
f-expression that induces the lexicographically minimal polynomial of degree 2m 3n with
n 1 is v(... v(u(... u(x)...))...) with m v’s followed by n u’s in left-to-right order.
≥
Moreover, this f-expression is e-isolated.
Proof. Let A := v(... v(u(... u(x)...))...) with m v’s followed by n u’s in left-to-right
′ ′ ′
order, and let A term(f;x) be such that A = A and dege(A ) = dege(A). It is
∈ 6
clear that A has exactly one core. Let k be the largest positive integer such that the
′
development of A agrees with every development of A at the kth stage. Let C denote
the f-expression at the kth stage of the development of A. Suppose k < n. Then we
′
can write A as f(...f(x ,C)...) and we can write A as either f(...f(U,C)...) or
1
f(...f(C,V )...) where x := x and U,V term(f;x) such that U = x. By Lemma
1
∈ 6
10

19, Lemma 20, and Lemma 21, we have deg(maxt(x )) > deg(maxt(D)) for every f-
1
expression D in the ellipses of f(...f(x ,C)...). It follows by Lemma 17 that e(A) <
1 L
′
e(A ). Suppose k n. Then we can write A as f(...f(C,x )...) and we can write
2
≥
′
A as f(...f(C,W)...), where x := x and W term(f;x) such that W = x. By
2
∈ 6
Lemma 20, we have deg(maxt(x )) > deg(maxt(E)) for every f-expression E in the
2
′
ellipses of f(...f(C,x )...). It follows by Lemma 18 that e(A) < e(A ). Thus, in
2 L
′
all cases we have e(A) < e(A ). It immediately follows from this analysis that A is
L
e-isolated, though we could well have proven this particular fact by repeatedly applying
Proposition 6 and Proposition 7.
As we will see, this concept of lexicographic minimality can be applied to prove that
many classes of f-expressions are e-isolated. This concept also illustrates one advantage
of working with the single-variable case of Friedman’s problem, because it is less clear
how one would lexicographically order multiple-variable polynomials.
′ ′
Proposition 27. Let f(f(F,x ),B) be an f-expression such that e(f(f(F,x ),B)) has
degree 2m 3n, where x′ := x. Suppose that
′ ′
1. 3dege(B) deg(maxt(x )), where we note that deg(maxt(x )) = 3 + 2dege(F)
≤
2m−23n
2. e(F) is lexicographically minimal among polynomials of degree induced by
f-expressions as characterized in Lemma 26
′
3. a, b are f-expressions such that e(f(a,b)) = e(f(f(F,x ),B)).
′
Then we must have a = f(F,x ) and e(b) = e(B).
′
Proof. First notice that m 2 and that, by Lemma 26, e(f(F,x )) is lexicographi-
≥
2m−13n
cally minimal among polynomials of degree induced by f-expressions. Writ-
f(f(F,x′ f(...f(x′′ ,B(n−1))...) x′′
ing ),B) as where := x, we see by Lemma 20 and
′′
Lemma 21 that deg(maxt(C)) deg(maxt(x )) for every f-expression C in the el-
≤
f(...f(x′′ ,B(n−1))...). f(a,b)[n] B(n)
lipses of It follows by Corollary 24 that = =
f(f(F,x′ ),B)[n]. f(a,b)[k] f(f(F,x′ ),B)[k]
Assume we know that = for some posi-
f(...f(f(f(F,x′ ),B)[k],D)...)
tive integer n k < m 1 + n. Suppose f(a,b) =
x≤ Writin− f(f(F,x′ f(...f(f(f(F,x′ ),B)[k],x′′′
where D = . g ),B) as )...) where
6
′′′ ′′′
x := x, we see by Lemma 20 that deg(maxt(E)) deg(maxt(x )) for every f-
≤
f(...f(f(f(F,x′ ),B)[k],x′′′
expression E in the ellipses of )...). It follows by Lemma
′
18 that e(f(a,b)) > e(f(f(F,x ),B)), which is a contradiction. Thus, we must have
L
f(a,b)[k+1] f(f(f(F,x′ ),B)[k],x) f(f(F,x′ ),B)[k+1].
= = This completes the induction.
f(a,b)[(m−1)+n]
Consequently, we have = f(F,x), so it follows that a = f(F,x). Finally,
e(f(f(F,x),b)) = e(f(f(F,x),B)) implies that e(b) = e(B).
Next, we will apply the concept of lexicographic minimality to prove another general
result. First, let A, B be fixed f-expressions. We examine some of the restrictions
e(f(A,B)) = e(f(C,D)) imposes on the f-expressions C and D. To avoid triviality,
assume e(B) = e(D). We have e(A)2 + e(B)3 = e(C)2 + e(D)3 iff
6
3 3 2 2
e(B) e(D) = e(C) e(A) (5)
− −
11

iff (e(B) e(D))(e(B)2 + e(B)e(D) + e(D)2) = e(C)2 e(A)2. Since e(B) e(D) =
− − − 6
0, we know that e(B) e(D) is not a constant. So we have deg(e(C)2 e(A)2) >
− −
max(2dege(B),2dege(D)). In particular, if dege(A) dege(B), then we must have
≤
2dege(C) > max(2dege(B),2dege(D)). (6)
This implies that 2dege(C) > 2dege(B) 2dege(A), which implies that dege(C) >
≥
dege(A). It then follows by (5) that e(B)3 > e(D)3, so we have e(B) > e(D). Of
L L
course, from (6) we also obtain dege(C) > dege(D). Therefore, we have established the
following
Lemma 28. Let A, B be fixed f-expressions such that dege(A) dege(B). If
≤
e(f(A,B)) = e(f(C,D)) and e(B) = e(D), then dege(C) > dege(A), e(B) > e(D),
L
6
and dege(C) > dege(D).
Notation 29. In what follows, we will denote the coefficient of the high-
est degree term of a polynomial p(x) by lead(p(x)). For example, we have
lead(e(f(f(x,f(x,x)),f(f(x,x),x)))) = 2.
f(A,f(E,B(m)))
For the next two propositions, fix term(f;x) where dege(E)
∈ ≤
dege(B(m)) dege(f(E,B(m))), e(f(A,f(E,B(m))))
and dege(A) so is monic, of degree
≤
3m+2. f(A,f(E,B(m))) f(A,f(E,f(x′ ,B(m−1)))),
Writing as we see that 2dege(A) <
deg(maxt(x′ dgap(A,f(E,B(m))) 3m+2
deg(maxt(E)) < )), because = 2dege(A)
− ≥
3m+2 2dege(f(E,B(m))) 3m+2 3m+1 3m+1 3m+1
= 2 = > 2dege(E) =
− − · −
dgap(E,B(m)) dgap(E,B(m)) 3m+1 3m+1 2dege(B(m))
and = 2dege(E) =
− ≥ −
3m+1 3m 3m 3m dgap(x′ ,B(m−1)). B(m)
2 = > 2 = It follows that is e-isolated with
− · −
f(A,f(E,B(m)))
respect to by Corollary 24. Suppose that
(m)
e(f(A,f(E,B ))) = e(f(C,D)).
f(F,B(m))
Then D = for some F term(f;x), so
∈
(m) (m)
e(f(A,f(E,B ))) = e(f(C,f(F,B ))). (7)
In the following two propositions and their corollaries, we will use Lemma 28 along with
the concept of lexicographic minimality to show that, for a large class of f-expressions
that E may assume, the preceeding equality implies that
F = E & e(C) = e(A). (8)
Proposition 30. Let f(A,f(E,B(m))) term(f;x) have the property that dege(E)
∈ ≤
dege(B(m)) and dege(A) dege(f(E,B(m))). Suppose that e(f(A,f(E,B(m)))) =
≤
e(f(C,D)). Then D = f(F,B(m)) for some F term(f;x). Furthermore, we must
∈
have e(E) e(F) and dege(E) = dege(F).
L
≥
Proof. We have already proved the first part of the conclusion in the discussion leading
up to (7), so it remains to show that e(E) e(F) and dege(E) = dege(F). If e(F) =
L
≥
e(f(F,B(m))) e(f(E,B(m))).
e(E), then we are done. Suppose e(F) = e(E). Then =
6 6
12

e(f(E,B(m))) e(f(F,B(m))),
By Lemma 28 we must have dege(C) > dege(A) and >
L
and it follows that
e(E) > e(F). (9)
L
Therefore, if dege(E) = dege(F), we must have dege(E) > dege(F); so let us assume
6
dege(E) > dege(F) and obtain a contradiction. We have
2 2 (m) 3 3 2 2 (m) 3 3
e(A) + (e(E) + e(B ) ) = e(C) + (e(F) + e(B ) ) .
e(B(m))9
After cancelling out the common from both sides, we see that the degree of the
deg(e(E)2e(B(m))6)
left-hand side is and the highest-degree term on the right-hand side
must be e(C)2 because deg(e(F)2e(B(m))6) < deg(e(E)2e(B(m))6). This means that
2 (m) 6
2dege(C) = deg(e(E) e(B ) ). (10)
Then the coefficient of the highest degree term of the left-hand side must be
lead(3e(E)2e(B(m))6) = 3lead(e(E))2lead(e(B(m)))6 = 3lead(e(E))2, and the coef-
ficient of the highest degree term of the right-hand side must be lead(e(C)2) =
lead(e(C))2. We must have lead(e(C))2 = 3lead(e(E))2, from which it follows that
lead(e(C)) = √3lead(e(E)), (11)
which is not even rational. This is a contradiction, so we must have dege(E) = dege(F).
Corollary 31. Under the hypotheses of Proposition 30, if E induces the lexicographi-
cally minimal polynomial with degree dege(E), then F = E and e(C) = e(A).
Proof. We must have e(E) = e(F) or e(E) < e(F). Since e(E) e(F) by Proposition
L L
≥
30, this forces e(F) = e(E), from which the conclusion follows by Lemma 26.
The next proposition will be a generalization of Proposition 30. We will demonstrate
f(E,B(m))
in Corollary 34 that (8) follows even if assumes values in a more general class
of f-expressions than that in Corollary 31.
Notation 32. For every integer 1 j m define the function Y : term(f;x)
j
≤ ≤ −→
f(A,B(j))
term(f;x) by Y (A) = for every A term(f;x); in other words, we can write
j
∈
,B(j))
Y = f( as a one-argument function.
j
−
Proposition 33. Assume Notation 32 above. Let 1 j m be a positive integer
≤ ≤
and d 1, ..., d j−1, d be a sequence of positive integers such that m = d > d >
j 1 2
... > d j−1 > d j 1. Let U term(f;x) with dege(U) dege(B(d j)) = 3d j, and
≥ ∈ ≤
let E = Y (Y (... Y (U)...)), so f(E,B(m)) = Y (E) = Y (Y (... Y (U)...)) =
d d d d d d d
2 3 j 1 1 2 j
Y Y ... Y (U). Let A term(f;x) be such that dege(A) dege(f(E,B(m))).
d d d
1 ◦ 2 ◦ ◦ j ∈ ≤
Suppose that e(f(C,D)) = e(f(A,f(E,B(m)))). Then there exists V term(f;x) such
∈
that D = Y Y ... Y (V ), e(U) e(V ), and dege(V ) = dege(U).
d d d L
1 ◦ 2 ◦ ◦ j ≥
13

Proof. We will prove this by induction on j. We have already proved the case j = 1
in Proposition 30. Now assume that the statement of this proposition holds for all
1 k j 1. In what follows, we will prove this proposition for j.
≤ ≤ −
e(f(A,f(E,B(m)))) f(E,B(m))
Since e(f(C,D)) = and = Y Y ...
d d
1 ◦ 2 ◦ ◦
Y (f(U,B(d j))), it follows from our inductive hypothesis (with f(U,B(d j)) in the
d j−1
˜ ˜
role of U) that D = Y Y ... Y (V ) for some V term(f;x) such that
d 1 ◦ d 2 ◦ ◦ d j−1 ∈
e(f(U,B(d j))) e(V˜ ) and dege(V˜ ) = dege(f(U,B(d j))). We claim that V˜ =
L
≥
f(V,B(d j)) for some V term(f;x) such that e(V ) e(U). Notice that we must have
L
∈ ≤
V˜ = f(V,W) for some V,W term(f;x), where dege(W) = dege(B(d j)). Notice also
∈
that f(U,B(d j)) = f(U,f(x′ ,B(d j−1))) where x′ := x, and deg(e(U)2) = 2dege(U)
≤
2dege(B(d j)) < 2+2dege(B(d j)) = deg(x′2)+2 deg(e(B(d j−1))3) = deg(maxt(x′ )). Sup-
pose W = B(d j). Then by Lemma 25 we have e(f(U,B(d j))) < e(f(V,W)) = e(V˜ ),
L
6
which is a contradiction. Hence we must have W = B(d j). Since e(f(U,B(d j)))
L
≥
e(V˜ ) = e(f(V,B(d j))), we have e(V ) e(U) as claimed.
L
≤
Now we want to show that dege(V ) = dege(U). Suppose
dege(V ) < dege(U). (12)
e(f(A,f(E,B(m))))
We will show that this leads to a contradiction. We have =
e(f(A,Y Y ... Y (U))) = e(A)2+(((... ((e(U)2+e(B(d j))3)2+e(B(d j−1))3)2 ...)2+
d d d
1◦ 2◦ ◦ j
e(B(d 2))3)2 + e(B(d 1))3)3 = e(C)2 + (((... ((e(V )2 + e(B(d j))3)2 + e(B(d j−1))3)2 ...)2 +
e(B(d 2))3)2 + e(B(d 1))3)3 = e(f(C,Y Y ... Y (V ))) = e(f(C,D)). Notice that,
d d d
1 ◦ 2 ◦ ◦ j
in the polynomial expansion of the preceeding five equalities, the terms (excluding
the e(A)2 and e(C)2) that do not contain e(U)2 as a factor or e(V )2 as a factor,
(e(B(d 2))3)2(e(B(d 1))3)2 for example, are common to both sides of the third equality
and can thus be subtracted off from these two sides. Subtracting off these common
terms leaves
deg(e(U)2 e(B(d j) )3 e(B(d j−1) )3 ...e(B(d 2) )3 e(B(d 1) )6
)
as the degree of the left-hand side of the third equality. Since
)2 e(B(d j) )3 e(B(d j−1) )3 ...e(B(d 2) )3 e(B(d 1) )6
deg(e(V )
is less than the degree of the left-hand side of the third equality by (12), it fol-
lows that 2dege(C) must equal the degree of the left-hand side of the third equal-
ity. We see from the third equality that the coefficient of the highest degree term
of the left-hand side is lead(3 2j−1e(U)2e(B(d j))3e(B(d j−1))3 ...e(B(d 2))3e(B(d 1))6) =
·
3 2j−1lead(e(U))2lead(e(B(d 1)))6 = 3 2j−1lead(e(U))2 and that the coefficient of
· ·
the highest degree term of the right-hand side is lead(e(C)2) = lead(e(C))2. It
follows that we must have lead(e(C))2 = 3 2j−1lead(e(U))2, which implies that
·
lead(e(C)) = √3 2j−1 lead(e(U)), which is not even rational. This is a contradiction,
·
so we must have dege(U) = dege(V ). This completes the induction.
Corollary 34. Under the hypotheses of Proposition 33, if e(U) is lexicographically
minimal among polynomials with degree dege(U) induced by f-expressions, then V = U
and e(A) = e(C).
14

Proof. We must have e(V ) = e(U) or e(V ) > e(U). Since e(U) e(V ) by Proposition
L L
≥
33, we must have e(V ) = e(U), from which the conclusion follows by Lemma 26.
In the proof of Proposition 30 (and analogously Proposition 33), we saw that, under
the hypotheses of this proposition and given dege(E) > dege(F), the subexpression C
e(f(E,B(m))) e(f(F,B(m))),
is not able to “make up” for the difference between and
e(f(C,f(F,B(m)))) e(f(A,f(E,B(m)))).
and hence = We will analyze and make use of
6
this phenomenon extensively in what follows, where we consider the developments of
f-expressions more complicated than A of Proposition 22.
Consider A,B ,E term(f;x) where B , E are subexpressions of A, dege(A) =
0 1 0 1
∈
p q m n i j
2 3 , dege(B ) = 2 3 , and dege(E ) = 2 3 . For the remainder of this paper, assume
0 1
the following three
Assumption 35. B contains all the cores of A and is e-isolated with respect to A.
0
Assumption 36. A[m+n+1] is either f(E ,B ) or f(B ,E ). In other words, we can write
1 0 0 1
A = f(...f(E ,B )...) or A = f(...f(B ,E )...) respectively.
1 0 0 1
′ ′′
Assumption 37. For every occurrence x of x in E and every occurrence x of x in
1
′
the ellipses of the expressions for A shown in Assumption 36 we have deg(maxt(x )) >
′′
deg(maxt(x )).
Remark 38. Note that Assumption 37 is a more general version of the corresponding
hypothesis in Proposition 22.
In the restricted version of Friedman’s problem we will study below, we will show
A[m+n+1]
that whether or not is e-isolated with respect to A is related to the solution
sets of certain exponential Diophantine equations.
In either of the cases A = f(...f(E ,B )...) or A = f(...f(B ,E )...) we have
1 0 0 1
m+π n+π i+π j+π
dgap(E ,B ) = 2 13 2 2 23 1 (13)
1 0
−
where π ,π = 0,1 . Note that π = 1 corresponds to the case A =
1 2 1
{ } { }
f(...f(B ,E )...) and π = 1 corresponds to the case A = f(...f(E ,B )...). We
0 1 2 1 0
could attempt to prove, as in Proposition 22, that f(E ,B ) or f(B ,E ) is e-isolated
1 0 0 1
with respect to A, but this assertion, if true, may be very difficult to prove. Below,
we will simply explore how this problem can be analyzed through the study of certain
Diophantine equations. Here are some lemmas that will aid us in this effort.
′
Lemma 39. Let A = f(...f(E ,B)...) and A = f(...f(E ,B)...) be f-expressions
1 2
such that dege(A) = 2p 3q = dege(A′ ), B contains all the cores of A, and B contains
′
at least one core of A . Suppose that for every occurrence x of x in E and for every
1 1
occurrence x of x in the ellipses of A we have deg(maxt(x )) > deg(maxt(x )). Suppose
2 1 2
′
that e(E ) < e(E ). Then e(A) < e(A ).
1 L 2 L
Proof. We can write e(E )2 = p (x)+q(x) and e(E )2 = p (x)+q(x), where p (x), p (x),
1 1 2 2 1 2
p q
2 3
q(x) are polynomials and deg(p (x)) < deg(p (x)). Examining (e(E )2 + e(B)3)3dege(B)
1 2 1
p q p q
from e(A) and (e(E )2 + e(B)3)3d2 eg3 e(B) from e(A′ ), we see that (q(x) + e(B)3)3d2 eg3 e(B)
2
15

p q
e(A′ e(B)3)3d2 eg3
is common to both e(A) and ). We have deg(e(A) (q(x) + e(B)) =
−
2p3q 2p3q
deg(p (x)) + ( 1)(3dege(B)) < deg(p (x)) + ( 1)(3dege(B))
1 3dege(B) − 2 3dege(B) − ≤
p q
deg(e(A′ e(B)3)3d2 eg3
) (q(x) + e(B)), from which the conclusion follows.
−
Analogously we have the following
′
Lemma 40. Let A = f(...f(B,E )...) and A = f(...f(B,E )...) be f-expressions
1 2
such that dege(A) = 2p 3q = dege(A′ ), B contains all the cores of A, and B contains
′
at least one core of A . Suppose that for every occurrence x of x in E and for every
1 1
occurrence x of x in the ellipses of A we have deg(maxt(x )) > deg(maxt(x )). Suppose
2 1 2
′
that e(E ) < e(E ). Then e(A) < e(A ).
1 L 2 L
¯ ¯ ¯
Suppose A term(f;x) such that e(A) = e(A). Then we must have dege(A) =
∈
2p 3q A¯[m+n]
dege(A) = and = B . Since B contains all the cores of A, B must
0 0 0
¯ ¯
contain all the cores of A; otherwise we would have lead(e(A)) > lead(e(A)), which
A¯[m+n+1]
is a contradiction. must be either f(E ,B ) or f(B ,E ) for some E
2 0 0 2 2
∈
¯ ¯
term(f;x), so we have either A = f(...f(E ,B )...) or A = f(...f(B ,E )...). We
2 0 0 2
¯
will say that A and A have the same orientation at the (m + n + 1)st stage
¯
if A = f(...f(E ,B )...) and A = f(...f(E ,B )...), or if A = f(...f(B ,E )...)
1 0 2 0 0 1
¯
and A = f(...f(B ,E )...). In each of the cases A = f(...f(E ,B )...) or A =
0 2 1 0
f(...f(B ,E )...), our ultimate goal (which, by the way, will not be achieved in this
0 1
¯
paper) is to show that A and A have the same orientation at the (m + n + 1)st stage
and furthermore that dgap(E ,B ) = dgap(E ,B ). In other words, in both cases we
2 0 1 0
want to show that dege(E ) = dege(E ), from which it would follow by Lemma 39 and
2 1
Lemma 40 that E = E whenever e(E ) is lexicographically minimal for its degree.
2 1 1
If dgap(E ,B ) < dgap(E ,B ), then deg(maxt(E )) = dege(A) dgap(E ,B ) >
2 0 1 0 2 2 0
−
¯
dege(A) dgap(E ,B ) = deg(maxt(E )), so under Assumption 37 we have e(A) >
1 0 1 L
−
e(A), which is a contradiction. Therefore, we must have
dgap(E ,B ) dgap(E ,B ). (14)
2 0 1 0
≥
Now, for the remainder of this paper, we make the following
¯
Assumption 41. Either A and A have the opposite orientation at the (m+n+1)st stage
or dgap(E ,B ) > dgap(E ,B ).
2 0 1 0
¯
Notice that Assumption 41 is the negation of the statement “A and A have the
same orientation at the (m + n + 1)st stage and dgap(E ,B ) = dgap(E ,B )” which
2 0 1 0
we hope to eventually prove, so we will try to derive contradictions under Assumption
41. Also notice that Assumption 41 implies that A[m+n+1] is not e-isolated with respect
to A. We will see in the following discussion that certain exponential Diophantine
equations must hold, and we will study these exponential Diophantine equations to see
how contradictions might be derived.
There exists C term(f;x) and positive integer l m + n + 1 such that either
∈ ≥
p q
A¯[l] f(C,A¯[l−1]) A¯[l] f(A¯[l−1],C), deg(e(A¯ 0)de2 ge(3
= or = and such that ) e(B B 0)) =
−
16

p q
2 3
deg(maxt(C)). Since deg(e(A) e(B 0)dege(B 0)) = deg(maxt(E 1)), we must also have
−
p q
2 3
¯
deg(e(A) e(B 0)dege(B 0)) = deg(maxt(E 1)), so deg(maxt(C)) = deg(maxt(E 1)). It
−
dgap(C,A¯[l−1])
follows that = dgap(E ,B ). Let us now introduce subscripts that will
1 0
show more about the relation between C and B . Thus, there will exist (possibly more
0
N
than one choice of) k ,k 0 and C term(f;x) (above called C), such that
1 2 k ,k
∈ ∪{ } 1 2 ∈
A¯[m+n+k 1+k 2] is either f(C ,A¯[m+n+k 1+k 2−1]) or f(A¯[m+n+k 1+k 2−1],C ), k 1
k ,k k ,k 1
1 2 1 2 ≥
or k 1,
2
≥
¯[m+n+k +k ] m+k n+k
dege(A 1 2 ) = 2 13 2, (15)
and
¯[m+n+k +k −1]
dgap(C ,A 1 2 ) = dgap(E ,B ); (16)
k ,k 1 0
1 2
note that, by our definition, k , k denote the number of times e(B ) gets squared and
1 2 0
the number of times e(B ) gets cubed, respectively, when we arrive at A¯[m+n+k 1+k 2].
0
We will call such a C a supplementing subexpression for E ; this is a gen-
k ,k 1
1 2
eralization of the “supplementing” C we mentioned in the paragraph following the
proof of Corollary 34. Notice that the case k = π , k = π corresponds to the
1 2 2 1
¯
case where A, A have the opposite orientation at the (m + n + 1)st stage and where
dgap(E ,B ) = dgap(E ,B ); in this case we have C = C = E , i.e. E is
2 0 1 0 k ,k π ,π 2 2
1 2 2 1
one such supplementing subexpression for E . The case k = π , k = π corresponds
1 1 1 2 2
¯
to the case where A and A have the same orientation at the (m + n + 1)st stage and
,A¯[m+n+k 1+k 2−1])
dgap(C = dgap(E ,B ). Since dgap(E ,B ) > dgap(E ,B ) by
k ,k 2 0 2 0 1 0
1 2
,A¯[m+n+k 1+k 2−1])
Assumption 41, we have dgap(C > dgap(E ,B ), which is a con-
k ,k 1 0
1 2
tradiction. Therefore, we can exclude the case k = π , k = π (which we will call
1 1 2 2
the excluded case) in our analysis below, because this case cannot happen under
Assumption 41.
Notice that either
m+k n+k ¯[m+n+k +k −1]
2 13 2 dgap(C ,A 1 2 ) = 3dege(C )
k ,k k ,k
− 1 2 1 2
or
m+k n+k ¯[m+n+k +k −1]
2 13 2 dgap(C ,A 1 2 ) = 2dege(C ),
k ,k k ,k
− 1 2 1 2
and both 3dege(C ), 2dege(C ) must be the product of a power of 2 and a power
k ,k k ,k
1 2 1 2
2m+k 13n+k ,A¯[m+n+k 1+k 2−1]) 2m+k 13n+k
of 3. Since 2 dgap(C = 2 dgap(E ,B ) =
k ,k 1 0
− 1 2 −
2m+k 13n+k (2m+π 13n+π 2i+π 23j+π
2 2 1), we must have
− −
m+k n+k m+π n+π i+π j+π l l
2 13 2 (2 13 2 2 23 1) = 2 13 2, (17)
− −
N
where l ,l 0 . Solving (17) will make it easier for us to determine whether or
1 2
∈ ∪ { }
not the supplementing subexpression C exists and more generally whether or not
k ,k
1 2
Assumption 41 can be true. Notice that Equation (17) is essentially the equation
a b c d e f g h
2 3 + 2 3 = 2 3 + 2 3 . (18)
We will study (18) in [1], where some partial results are proven.
17

References
[1] Roger Tian, On the Diophantine Equation 2a 3b + 2c 3d = 2e 3f + 2g 3h . Preprint, 6
pp., 2009.
18