 
 
Print ISSN: 2958-3675 || Online ISSN: 2958-3683 
International Journal of Medical and Pharmaceutical Research 
Journal Home Page: www.ijmpr.in 
Vol-1 Iss-1, JUL-DEC 2020 
Determination Of Heavy Metals In Hand Dug Well Water Near Dumpsite In Fadaman 
Mada Bauchi 
 
Lilian Idode1, AuwalA.Mahmoud2,Yakubu Hamza3* 
Abubakar Tafawa Balewa University, Bauchi-Nigeria1,2,3 
A B S T R A C T 
In this study, the level of Cadnium, Zinc, Lead, Silver, Nickel, and Chromium was determined in some selected wells 
near dumpsite in FadamanMada, (Kasuwan Rake) of Bauchi State. Heavy metals Determination was conducted by using 
Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (A.A.S) to know the extent of the concentration of these metals in well water 
located near the dumpsite. Six (6) water samples were collected from different wells which were analyzed for the above 
metals. The samples were preserved and digested. The results indicate that there was no trace of Nickel, however 
Chromium and Zinc were detected and fall within the permissible limits of World Health Organization (WHO) values of 
0.05mg/l and 3mg/l. Cadmium, Silver and Lead were found to be above the permissible limits of (WHO) World Health 
organization  values  of  0.003mg/l,  0.10mg/l  and  0.01mg/l  respectively.  These  levels  rendered  the  water  unsafe  for 
consumption due to the established adverse effects. 
 
Keywords: Heavy metals, Water, Spectrophotometer, Concentration and Samples. 
*Corresponding Author 
Yakubu Hamza 
AbubakarTafawa Balewa University, Bauchi- 
Nigeria 
   © Copy Right, IJMPR, 2020. All Rights Reserved   
 
INTRODUCTION 
Fadaman Mada is located in Bauchi State Nigeria. In most developing countries of the world Solid  waste disposal 
has been a chronic problem particularly in area with high population density. [1]. Human activities on earth give rise to 
residual materials which are not of immediate use where they arise. These residual materials may be recycled, reclaimed, 
or reused; otherwise they constitute waste which will ultimately be released to the environment in mobile form or insitu. 
[2]. The biosphere has the capacity to transform many wastes over time, either into harmless products or into nutrients 
which can be used again. However, the natural assimilative capacity of the environment can easily be exceeded if waste 
particularly from man’s activities is not controlled. Waste is generated universally and is a direct consequence of all 
human activities. The disposal of solid waste into the land has been recognized as the major source of Ground water 
contamination.  Waste  disposal  by  land  fill  has  led  to  pollution  of  ground  water  resources  under  a  wide  range  of 
conditions around the globe [3]. 
 
Waste is defined as unwanted or undesired materials accumulating after the completion of a process [4]. Waste was 
also  characterized  as  items  that  are  no  longer  used  for  any  significant  function.  They  are  classified  as  items  with 
hazardous properties. Such hazardous wastes include household dump items, sewage, sludge, waste from manufacturing 
industries etc. [5]. The United Nations Environmental Programme Define waste as those materials which the initial user 
has no further use for either purpose of production, transformation or consumption and of which can be disposed off. [6]. 
 
Industrial revolution gave birth to the large volume of industrial chemical discharge which has added to the growing 
load of untreated domestic waste. The disposal of domestic, commercial and industrial garbage in the world is often a 
problem that continues to grow with human civilization and no method so far is completely safe. Experience has shown 
that all forms of waste disposal have negative consequence on the environment, public health and social economic. 
Dumpsite is an old traditional system of waste disposal similar to land fill method of waste Management. Dumpsite are 
often  established  in  disused  quarries,  mining  or  excavated  pits  away  from  individual  residence  areas,  designated 
government agency, cooperate bodies and some individual collect waste routinely into these dumpsite. Here in Nigeria, 
modern land fill facilities are not found in these dumpsite; consequently sorting out of waste into degradable and no 
degradable and recyclable precious materials cannot be achieved. Poor management of dumpsite could create a number 
of adverse environmental impact, including wind-blow litter, attraction of mice and pollutant such as leachate, which can 
pollute  ground  water.  Land  fill  gas  mostly  is  compose  of  methane  and  carbon  dioxide  are  produce  through 
biodegradation of such waste[7]. 
IJMPR; Volume: 1; Issue: 1; Pages: 73-77          | P a g e - 73 

Water 
Water is the world greatest natural resource, yet most people under value its worth. Diamond, gold and emerald are 
priced because they are so rare, yet none has the value of water, a chemical compound so common that it is found almost 
everywhere in the world. Approximately 70% of our body (human beings) is composed of water. Water is so vital that 
most people will die within 48 hours if they cannot replenish their water reserves. By comparison, most people can 
survive for a week or more without food. No living organism is less than 50 percent in comparison by water, and some 97 
percent of water [8]. 
 
Hospital wastes are generated during the diagnosis, treatment or immunization of human beings and animals or in 
research activities in production or testing of biological analysis. These wastes are mainly in form of disposable syringe, 
swabs and bandages, body fluid, human excreta etc. This waste is highly infectious and can be a serious threat to human 
health[9]. 
 
Heavy Metals 
Heavy metals are referred to as any metallic element that have relatively high density and is toxic or poisonous even 
at low concentration. Heavy metal is a collective term that applies to the group of metals and metalloids with atomic 
density greater than 4g/cm3 or 5times or  greater than water. Their pollution of the  environment, even at low levels and 
the resulting long – term cumulative health effects are among the leading health concerns all over the world [10]. They 
occur as natural constituents of the earth crust, and are persistent environmental pollutant since they cannot be degradable 
and destroyed, human activities effect geological and biological distribution of heavy metals through pollution of air, 
water, and soil. Human are also responsible for altering the chemical forms of heavy metals released to the environment. 
Such alteration often affect a heavy metal toxicity by allowing bioaccumulation in plant and animal. Heavy metals and 
chemicals accumulate in living things anytime they are taken up and stored faster than they are broken down[11]. 
 
Heavy metals become toxic when they are not metabolized by the body and accumulate in the Soft tissues. Heavy 
metals may enter the human body through food, water, air, or absorption through the skin when they come in contact 
with  humans  in  agriculture  and  in  manufacturing,  Pharmaceutical,  industrial,  or  residential  settings.  Heavy  metal 
poisoning could result, for instance, from drinking-water contamination (e.g. lead pipes), high ambient air concentrations 
near emission sources, or intake via the food chain[12]. Some  heavy metals like Ar, Cd and Pb have been reported to 
have no known bio-importance in human biochemistry and physiology and consumption even at very low concentrations 
can be toxic [10]. Heavy metals can enter a water supply by industrial and consumer waste, or even from acidic rain 
breaking down soils and releasing heavy metals into streams, lakes, rivers, and groundwater [12]. 
 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Equipment and Apparatus 
The equipment and apparatus used for the research include Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS) (Buck 
Scientific, United States of America), Conical flask, Stop watch, Funnel, Wattman filter paper and Distilled water 
 
Chemicals and Reagent 
The following chemicals and reagents were used during the research analysis; 
Hydrochloric Acid (HCL), (Ahmedabad Chemicals) 
Nitric Acid (HNO ) 
3
Hydrogen peroxide (H O ) 
2 2
All glass and plastic wares used and were thoroughly washed with detergent solution and then rinsed with 5% Nitric acid, 
distilled water. 
 
Sample Collection and Treatment 
Six (6) samples were collected from Fadama Mada from different hand dug well water near dumpsite in a sterilize 
Polyethylene container, after collection it was taken to laboratory for analysis. The water from hand dug well near 
dumpsite after collection was treated with nitric acid to avoid precipitation of the heavy metals. The treatment  was 
carried out by adding 10cm3 of nitric acid to 1L and stored in a refrigerator till it is needed for the analysis. 
 
Digestion of Sample 
Concentration  of  Cd,  Cr,  Pb,  Zn,  Ni  and  Ag  in  the  digested  water  sample  was  estimated  using  (A.A.S)  Atomic 
Absorption Spectrophotometer. This was carried out by measuring 100cm3 of the water sample into a 200cm3 volumetric 
flask and put in a conical flask, 5cm3 of concentrated nitric acid was added. The mixture was then slowly heated on a hot 
plate which was evaporated to about 20ml ensuring that the mixture did not boil. A further 5cm3 of concentrated nitric 
acid  was  added  while  heating  continues  until  the  solution  becomes  light  colour  and clear.  Then  a  further  2cm3  of 
hydrochloric acid was added and heated lightly to dissolve any remaining residue and then few drops of hydrogen 
peroxide was added in drops to ensure complete digestion has taken place. Lastly the solution was filtered and the filtrate 
IJMPR; Volume: 1; Issue: 1; Pages: 73-77          | P a g e - 74 

was transferred into a 100cm3 volumetric flask and made to mark with distilled water, The digested samples obtained 
were  used  to  determine  the concentration  of  Chromium (Cr),  Zinc  (Zn),  Cadmium  Cd,  Iron (Fe),  Nickel  (Ni)  and 
Mercury (Hg) using Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (A.A.S). 
 
Statistical Analysis 
Data obtained were analyzed using descriptive statistics for the mean and standard deviation. One  way ANOVA was 
used to test the significant differences in the concentration of heavy metals from the six different well water samples at 
(p≤0.05). It was observed that zinc and cadmium showed significant difference in their mean concentration, lead, silver 
and chromium showed no significant difference in their mean concentration whilst nickel was not detected. 
 
Determination of Heavy Metals 
The  heavy  metals  (cadmium,  nickel,  silver,  Arsenic  and  lead),  were  determined  using  the  Atomic  Absorption 
Spectrophotometer by following the standard procedure of AOAC. The buck scientific spectrophotometer VGP (Variable 
Giant Pulse) system model 210 was used. The VGP uses a time specific modulation of the Hollow Cathode Lamp (HCL) 
to produce energy pulse that contains information on both the sample (analyte) absorbance and background (matrix) 
absorbance. Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer is based on the ability of an excited atom of an element to absorb 
energy from wavelength of light of the same frequency as the element. This creates a decrease in the initial signal energy 
and  this  difference  is  proportional  to  concentration  of  the  element.  Each  element  has  its  own  series  of  specific 
wavelength. This wavelength will have specific characteristics for sensitivity, noise and linearity. Sensitivity and noise 
will determine the limit of detection for that element [13]. 
 
Principles and Instrumentation of the AAS 
The technique makes use of absorption spectrometry to assess the concentration of the analyte in the sample. It relies 
therefore on the Beer-Lambarts law. In short, the electrons of the atoms in the atomizer can be promoted to higher orbital 
for a short amount of time by absorbing a set quantity of energy (I e light of a given wavelength). This amount of energy 
(or wavelength) is specific to a particular electron transition in a particular element, and in general, each wavelength 
corresponds to only one element. This gives the technique its selectivity. As the quantity of energy(the power) put into 
the flame is known, the quantity remaining at the other side (at the detector) can be measured, it is possible from Beer- 
Lamberts law, to calculate how many of these transitions take place, and thus get a signal that is proportional to the 
concentration of the element being measured [13]. In atomic absorption, there are two methods of adding thermal energy 
to a sample. A graphite furnace AAS uses a graphite tube with a strong electric current to heat the sample. In flame AAS; 
we  aspirate  a  sample  into  a  flame  using  a  nebulizer.  The  flame  is  lined  up  in  a  beam  of  light  of  the  appropriate 
wavelength.  The flame  (thermal  energy)  causes  the  atom  to  undergo  a  transition  from  the ground  state  to  the  first 
transition state. When the atoms make their transitions, they absorb some of the light from the beam (AOAC, 2003) the 
concentration is proportional to the light absorbed. 
 
RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
The determination of the concentration of cadmium (Cd), (Pb) Lead, (Ni) Nickel, (Cr) Chromium, (Ag) Silver and 
(Zn) Zinc from drinking well water close to dumpsite from different location in Fadama Mada Bauchi, Bauchi State are 
presented below; 
 
Table 1: Mean concentration of some selected heavy metals (mg/L) in well water samples in FadamaMada 
(Kasuwan Rake) Bauchi, State. 
 
FadamaMada    Mean concentration of heavy metal in (mg/L)   
  Cd  Ni  Zn  Ag  Pb  Cr 
Well A  0.16 ± 0.02a  0.00 ± 0.00  0.88 ± 0.03a  0.15 ± 0.02  0.07 ± 0.01  0.01 ± 0.00 
Well B  0.32 ± 0.01b  0.00 ± 0.00  0.06 ± 0.03b  0.17 ± 0.02  0.06 ± 0.01  0.01 ± 0.00 
Well C  2.25 ± 0.01c  0.00 ± 0.00  1.96 ± 0.04c  0.21 ± 0.02  0.09 ± 0.01  0.02 ± 0.01 
Well D  0.51 ± 0.02d  0.00 ± 0.00  0.33± 0.02d  0.22 ± 0.03  0.08 ± 0.01  0.01 ± 0.00 
Well E  0.41 ± 0.00e  0.00 ± 0.00  0.36 ± 0.01e  0.28 ± 0.01  0.11 ± 0.01  0.01 ± 0.01 
Well F  0.58 ± 0.00f  0.00 ± 0.00  0.50 ± 0.01f  0.11 ± 0.02  0.4 ± 0.01  0.003± 0.00 
 
 
 
 
Value are mean ± standard deviation (n=3) 
IJMPR; Volume: 1; Issue: 1; Pages: 73-77          | P a g e - 75 

Values on the same column with the same letters are significantly the same (p≤0.05) as revealed by one way ANOVA. 
Values on the same column with different letters are significantly different (p≤0.05) as revealed by the same ANOVA 
and least significant difference test (p≤0.05). 
 
Maximum Permissible limits of the various element by [14]. 
 
Heavy Metals  Permissible Limit (mg/L) 
Cd  0.003 
Ni  0.02 
Zn  3.00 
Ag  0.10 
Pb  0.01 
Cr  0.05 
 
 
DISCUSSION 
The mean concentration of Cadmium (Cd) in the water sample from well A, well B, well C, well E and well F are 
0.16 ± 0.02, 0.32 ± 0.01, 2.25 ± 0.01, 0.51 ± 0.02, 0.41 ± 0.00 and 0.58 ± 0.00 mg/L. All samples from A to F where 
found to be above the permissible limit of (WHO) which is 0.003mg/L. Excess of Cadmium in the water samples may be 
as a result of the presence of cadmium containing waste substances such as batteries, television set, insecticide rubbers 
e.t.c Cadmium leads to various health effect such as kidney damage, it also effect the nervous system, causes damage to 
DNA and the immune system and enhance the development of cancer .it can also cause loss of sense, smell and taste 
,shortness of breath, skeletal effect, hypertension and cardiovascular diseases [14]. Food is the main source of daily 
exposure to Cadmium. 
 
Nikel is considered as one of the most essential trace element to human and animals. The concentration of Nickel 
was not detected in the well water samples from A to F, the maximum permissible limit for Nickel is 0.02mg/L. 
 
The mean concentration of Zinc in well water samples from A to F are 0.88 ±0.03, 0.06 ± 0.03, 1.96 ± 0.01, 0.33 ± 
0.02, 0.36 ± 0.01 and 0.50 ± 0.01mg/L and the permissible limit for Zinc is 3mg/l. All samples were found to be within 
the acceptable range of 3mg/L. 
 
The mean concentration of Silver (Ag) in well water samples from well A to F are 0.15 ± 0.02, 0.17 ± 0.02, 0.21 ± 
0.02, 0.22 ±0.03, 0.28 ± 0.01 and 0.11 ± 0.02 mg/LThe permissible limit for silver by (W.H.O) was found to be 0.1mg/L 
Therefore the concentration of Silver in the samples were found to be above the maximum permissible limit of (W.H.O). 
This may be as a result of Silver containing materials found in the waste. 
 
The mean concentration of Lead (Pb) in the well water samples from well A to F are 0.07 ± 0.01, 0.06 ± 0.01, 0.09 
±0.01, 0.08 ± 0.01, 0.11 ± 0.01 and 0.4 ±0.01mg/L all concentration were found to be above the permissible limits of 
(W.H.O) which is 0.01 mg/L. Comparing with (John  et al, 2013) it showed that the concentration of Lead (Pb) in both 
wet and dry season were above the permissible limit of (W.H.O).This can be as a result of lead containing materials in 
the waste close to the water area. Lead is a well-known poison and is one of the most significant toxicant of heavy metals 
and its inorganic form are absorbed by ingestion, food and inhalation, Lead is very toxic and has serious health problems 
even at low concentration[15]. 
 
The mean concentration of Chromium (Cr) from well A to E are 0.01 ± 0.00, 0.01 ± 0.00, 0.02 ± 0.01, 0.01 ± 0.00, 
± 0.01 and 0.003 ± 0.00 mg/Lfrom the result above it is considered that all concentration of Chromium from well A 
to F fall within the acceptable limit of (W .H .O) which is 0.05mg/L. 
 
CONCLUSION 
Ground water is one of the major water sources in most village areas. The public use ground water for drinking 
purpose and the results from the determination of heavy metals in the well samples shows that Cadmium, Lead and Silver 
IJMPR; Volume: 1; Issue: 1; Pages: 73-77          | P a g e - 76 

| Heavy Metals   |   Permissible Limit (mg/L) |
|:---------------|---------------------------:|
| Cd             |                      0.003 |
| Ni             |                      0.02  |
| Zn             |                      3     |
| Ag             |                      0.1   |
| Pb             |                      0.01  |
| Cr             |                      0.05  |

were found with high concentration level, which can cause health complication for people drinking from the well and 
also children are highly at risk drinking such water. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
From the above research, contamination by Cadmium, Lead and Silver were observed and pose detrimental effects to 
human health and the environment. Therefore the following recommendations were made; 
I.  The environment should be kept clean by having proper disposal of Waste in Fadama’mada area Kasuwa rake. 
II.  Public awareness program should be considered to inform people of health risk of heavy metal contamination in 
water. 
III.  Sustainable technology should be used to improve drinking water quality of in rural area and also law income 
household. 
  
REFERENCES 
1.  Streans R. and Petoyan G. (1984). Utilizaton of landfill as building site waste management. Research 2:75-83. 
2.  USEPA, (2008). Municipal Solid Waste in the United State. 2007 facts and Figures. EPA-530-R 08-010.Vision 
20.20  Municipal  solid  waste  generation,  recycling  and  Disposal  all,  Facts  and  Figures  for  2012.Water  Quality 
International headquarter and Laboratory, international Journal of advance research Vol 3 page 13-18. 
3.  Afzal, M. and Elahe, A.P. (2008). Groundwater Quality and Sources of Pollution in Baghan Watershed, Iran. World 
Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology. 101-109. 
4.  Cointrean S.J (2001)Declaration of principles for sustainable and integrated solid waste management. A project 
guide 4th Edition world Bank Washington, 97-98. 
5.  Obeka, S.S. (2005). Philosophies and Science of Theories of Science and Technology Concept of Environmental 
Education. A.B.U., Press Ltd, Zaria. Pp 87 
6.  UNEP, (2000). State of the Environment (SOE): Overview at Regional and Global Levels. 
7.  Dosumu, O.O, Salami, N. and Adekola, F.A. (2003). Comparative study of trace element levels. Bull. chem. soc. 
Ethiop 17(1), 107-112. 
8.  Croombs B. and Crabow .O. (1996) field Testing of water in developing countries WEDC. 1-37. 
9.  Fai F.Y. Danbature W.L. Barambu, A.U.(2013). Assessment of some heavy metals in Ground water of Gombe State 
University and its Environment. Journal of chemical society Nigeria, 38(2):24-26. 
10.  Yahaya M.I, Ezeh G.C. Musa Y.F. Mohammed S.Y. (2010). Concentration in Road Sides’ Soil in Yauri, Nigeria. 
African journal of pure and applied chemistry.4(3): 022-030, 
11.  Imasuen O.I and Egai A.O. (2013) Concentration and Environmental Implication of Heavy metals in surface water in 
Aguobi community, journal of applied Science Environmental Management. Vol. 17(4), 467-472. 
12.  Lenntech (2005). Lenntech Water Treatment and Air Purification Holdings Facts Sheet. 
13.  AOAC Method (2003) official method of analysis of the Association of Official Analytical Chemist 17th Edition 
AOAC Arlington, Vrginu. 
14.  WHO, (2007). Water for Pharmaceutical Use. In: Quality Assurance of Pharmaceuticals: A Compendium of 
Guidelines and Related Materials. 2nd Updated Edition World Health Organization, Geneva,5(2): 170-187. 
15.  Okoronko E.A. Ebisike .K. (2010)Biosorption of copper and zinc from Aqueous solution of bamboo biomass in 
batchand coloum studies, journal of Biology chemistry science 4(2):314-326. 
IJMPR; Volume: 1; Issue: 1; Pages: 73-77          | P a g e - 77 