Are You Ready? Towards the Engineering of
Forensic-Ready Systems
George Grispos1, Jesu´s Garc´ıa-Gala´n1, Liliana Pasquale2, Bashar Nuseibeh1,3
1Lero – The Irish Software Research Centre, University of Limerick, Ireland
2Lero – The Irish Software Research Centre, University College Dublin, Ireland
3The Open University, Milton Keynes, United Kingdom
george.grispos@lero.ie, jesus.galan@lero.ie, liliana.pasquale@lero.ie, bashar.nuseibeh@lero.ie
7102 yaM 51  ]ES.sc[  2v05230.5071:viXra
Abstract—1. As security incidents continue to impact organi- tems [5]. However, such data might not always be available
sations, there is a growing demand for systems to be ‘forensic- for a variety of reasons including limited physical access, short
ready’ – to maximise the potential use of evidence whilst min-
data retention times and the costs associated with conducting
imising the costs of an investigation. Researchers have supported
such investigations [6], [7]. As a result, investigators may not
organisational forensic readiness efforts by proposing the use of
be able to identify the causes of an incident [7]. Hence, there
policies and processes, aligning systems with forensics objectives
and training employees. However, recent work has also proposed have been increasing calls for organisations to maximise their
an alternative strategy for implementing forensic readiness called potential use of evidence and minimise the costs of an inves-
forensic-by-design. This is an approach that involves integrating
tigation by ensuring that their systems and infrastructure are
requirements for forensics into relevant phases of the systems
‘forensic-ready’ [8], [9]. Researchers have supported forensic
development lifecycle with the aim of engineering forensic-ready
readiness efforts by proposing that organisations implement
systems. While this alternative forensic readiness strategy has
been discussed in the literature, no previous research has exam- policies and processes [8], align systems with forensics objec-
ined the extent to which organisations actually use this approach tives [10] and the correct training of employees [8].
for implementing forensic readiness. Hence, we investigate the
In the past few years, researchers have proposed an alterna-
extent to which organisations consider requirements for forensics
tive forensic readiness strategy called forensic-by-design [11],
during systems development. We first assessed existing research
[12]. Conceptually, forensic-by-design is similar to security-
to identify the various perspectives of implementing forensic
readiness, and then undertook an online survey to investigate by-design, where requirements for forensics are integrated into
the consideration of requirements for forensics during systems relevant phases of the systems development lifecycle, with the
development lifecycles. Our findings provide an initial assessment
objective of engineering forensic-ready systems [11]. While
of the extent to which requirements for forensics are considered
this approach has been discussed in the literature, no previous
within organisations. We then use our findings, coupled with the
research has examined the extent to which organisations
literature, to identify a number of research challenges regarding
the engineering of forensic-ready systems. actually implement this approach to achieve forensic readiness.
Index Terms—Forensic Readiness, Forensic-By-Design, Survey. Hence, our paper provides an initial assessment of the extent
to which requirements for forensics are considered within
organisations. As a method, we analysed the literature to
I. INTRODUCTION
examine the various perspectives of implementing forensic
According to a recent industrial survey, a quarter of all readiness. We then undertook an online survey to examine the
businesses in the United Kingdom detected a security incident industrial perspective on the ‘forensic-by-design’ approach to
in the previous twelve months [1]. The consequences of such forensic readiness. The survey targeted practitioners tradition-
incidents for an organisation can include significant financial ally involved in the development lifecycle, as well as security
losses, a loss of customer confidence and a reduction in and forensics professionals. The survey results, coupled with
business reputation [2]. When a security incident occurs, the findings from the literature are then used to propose
organisations usually respond by conducting a forensic inves- research challenges that emerge from our work.
tigation [3]. The purpose of this investigation is to collect and The paper is structured as follows. Section II describes the
analyse forensic data such as log files and network traffic, in research methodology and Section III reviews various perspec-
order establish the cause of the incident and how it can be tives on implementing forensic readiness. Section IV presents
prevented in the future [4]. the survey results and discusses the threats to the validity
In order to examine the causes of an incident, investigators of our study. Section V presents the research challenges that
rely on the availability of forensic data from affected sys- emerge from our work and Section VI draws conclusions.
1Recommended Citation: G. Grispos, J. Garc´ıa-Gala´n, L. Pasquale and II. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
B. Nuseibeh (2017). Are You Ready? Towards the Engineering of Forensic-
The research described in this paper uses a two-step ex-
Ready Systems. IEEE 11th International Conference on Research Challenges
in Information Science, Brighton, United Kingdom. ploratory research approach [13]. We first assessed the litera-

ture for existing research on implementing forensic readiness organisations ignore what happens to their system(s) prior
within organisations, as well as relevant literature related to to an incident, data that is required for an investigation will
the use of forensic-by-design approaches. After assessing the either exist and is preserved by the system, or it does not
literature, we then undertook an online survey to investigate exist and the incident cannot be investigated effectively. These
the industrial perspective on the use of forensic-by-design concerns have prompted recommendations that organisations
approaches. The survey was designed and hosted on LimeSer- take a more proactive stance to digital forensics and structure
vice [14], an online survey platform, from March to August their environment to retain data required for investigations [8],
2016. The survey research method was chosen because it [9]. This stance is known as forensic readiness [8]. Researchers
provides a low-cost approach for collecting a large cross- have broadly defined forensic readiness solutions along the
section of subjective responses from respondents [15]. The lines of implementing policies and processes, aligning systems
survey consisted of twenty ‘closed’ questions2. However, the with forensics objectives and the training of employees.
number of questions actually presented to the participant was 1) Policies: Policies can provide a cohesive structure by
dependent upon the answers provided during the survey. The indicating what needs to be done within an organisation [18],
survey was divided into three parts. In part one participant [19]. As a result, researchers have suggested that organisations
information was collected, while the second and third parts of implement well–defined policies to support forensic readi-
the survey presented questions on requirements for investiga- ness [8], [20]. Barske, et al. [20] assert that these policies
tions and forensic data, respectively. The questions consisted include how systems are monitored, under what conditions
of 3, 5 and 7-point semantic scale answers. Where required, data is preserved, data retention times, as well as policies on
we also included a text-box for respondents to provide textual how investigations are to be undertaken. Rowlingson [8] adds
answers. These type of questions allow for eliciting subjective that policies should also cover topics such as identifying data
assessment, while providing some flexibility when interpreting sources, determining data collection and secure data storage.
the results [15]. The questions were approved by an Ethics Endicott-Popovsky, et al. [21] argue that such policies should
Committee at the University of Limerick. In total, the survey be regularly audited to ensure continuous forensic readiness.
took approximately twelve minutes to complete. 2) Systems and Frameworks: Tan [9] proposed the concept
The survey targeted individuals via LinkedIn groups where of ‘system forensic readiness’, which consists of identifying
the focus of the group was software engineering/development, what data sources exist within an organisation and what
requirements engineering, security or digital forensics. A short happens to data that could be used as evidence. This concept
post was placed in each group, inviting the members to partici- has been well discussed in the literature [8], [20], [22], [23].
pate in the survey. The survey targeted individuals traditionally Separately, other researchers have suggested using technology
involved in the development lifecycle, as well as security to enhance forensic readiness [10], [24]. The idea is that
and forensics professionals. We believe that responses from technology can be used to assist investigators to identify
the later individuals would benefit our study due to their in- malicious users and their activities. For example, Reddy and
volvement in security incidents and forensic investigations [4], Venter [10] proposed an architecture for a forensic readiness
[16]. This recruitment approach aligns with the purpose and management system that includes monitoring for security
relevance of the study targeting industrial professionals. incidents, escalation rules, storing data, recording training
After closing the survey, all the data including any re- and descriptions of business processes. Similarly, Grobler
spondent comments were aggregated and analysed using a and Louwrens [24] put forward the idea that organisations
combination of a qualitative and quantitative approach. The implement digital evidence record management systems to
idea behind the analysis was to identify trends, patterns and retain potential evidence in its original format.
anomalies. Based on the survey findings and the analysis of 3) Processes: While some researchers have proposed using
the literature, we then identified research challenges related to technology, others have argued that well–defined processes
the engineering of forensic-ready systems. can help enhance forensic readiness [11], [20], [23], [25]. For
example, supporting forensic investigators with a well-defined
III. ANALYSIS OF FORENSIC READINESS APPROACHES investigation process can help reduce mistakes during investi-
gations [23], [25]. Moreover, data preservation and collection
Digital forensics is often part of an organisation’s security
processes can also increase the speed of an investigation and
incident response capability [17]. While the objective of inci-
decrease the cost of reacquiring any data that was not acquired
dent response is to restore service and learn about a security
correctly [8], [26]. Tan [9] adds that organisations should
incident, digital forensics is concerned with the collection and
have processes for defining how and what logging is done,
analysis of forensic data, which can then be used as evidence
how systems are examined, and how forensic data is acquired
in court [17]. Several approaches have been proposed for
during investigations. Other researchers have suggested that
conducting forensic investigations (e.g., [5], [17]).
organisations have processes to identify incident scenarios and
Traditionally, investigators only attempt to collect and anal-
the forensic data required for these scenarios [8], [21], [24].
yse forensic data concerning an incident after it has oc-
4) People: Researchers have contended that organisations
curred [16]. However, Rowlingson [8] argues that because
should establish multidisciplinary forensic readiness teams [6],
2http://spare.lero.ie/pdf/survey questions.pdf [9], [22], [27]. Dalmani, et al. [27] argue that adding legal

experts to this team can assist investigators with determining A. Requirements for Investigations
the scope of potential evidence to be collected. Grispos, et al.
Initial questions asked our survey participants if their or-
[6] argue that integrating a human resources department within
ganisation had in the past elicited requirements concerning
this team can assist investigators with employees who are in-
the detection, investigation, eradication and recovery of inci-
volved in an incident. However, before this forensic readiness
dents. These are investigation phases commonly cited in the
team can assist investigators it must receive the correct training
literature [16]. The responses are summarised in Table I.
to fulfil its objectives [8], [28]. For example, investigators
TABLE I: Consideration of Requirements for Investigations
need to be trained on how to conduct a forensic investigation
correctly. A failure to do so can increase investigation costs Requirements to assist with Yes No DNK
the detection of incidents 63.8% 33% 3.2%
and result in compromised evidence [28].
the investigation of incidents 34% 60.7% 5.3%
5) Forensics-By-Design Approaches: In the past few
the eradication of incidents 28.7% 63.8% 7.5%
years, researchers have proposed an alternative forensic readi- the recovery from incidents 36.2% 58.5% 5.3%
ness strategy known as forensic-by-design [11], [12]. Ab
The table shows that nearly 64% of the respondents in-
Rahman, et al. [11] proposed a forensic-by-design framework
dicated that their organisation consider requirements for the
to integrate forensic tools and best practices in the design and
detection of incidents. However, a smaller number of par-
development of cyber-physical cloud systems. Ab Rahman,
ticipants stated that their organisations consider the other
et al. [29] later expanded their approach to include incident
requirements. 34% of the respondents indicated that require-
handling capabilities and evaluated their approach using cloud
ments to assist with incident investigations were considered in
storage services. Mink, et al. [12] discussed the impact of
their organisation, and nearly 29% of the respondents stated
digital forensics on next generation aircraft systems and con-
that their organisation considers requirements to assist with
cluded that forensic-by-design principles should be integrated
the eradication of incidents. Moreover, approximately 36%
into such systems. While researchers have proposed the use of
of the respondents stated that their organisation considered
forensic-by-design to enhance forensic readiness, no previous
requirements to aid the recovery from incidents.
research has examined the extent to which organisations
The participants were then asked where these requirements
actually use this approach during systems development.
were first discussed in the development process, with the
results summarised in Table II. Note respondents were able to
IV. SURVEY OF PRACTITIONERS
select more than one answer. The variety of answers that were
126 participants attempted our survey. Filtering out in-
received from this question shows that organisations appear
complete and invalid responses resulted in 94 valid re-
to consider such requirements throughout the development
sponses (74.6% completion rate). Nearly 55% of the respon-
lifecycle. However, the results also indicate that in some organ-
dents indicated that they were involved in software devel-
isations these requirements are considered after deployment
opment roles. This includes software/system engineers (27
(post-delivery). Consequently, this could result in increased
responses), software/project managers (14 responses) and pro-
development costs and delayed release times [30].
grammers/developers (10 responses). The remaining respon-
dents included consultants (17 responses), security engineers TABLE II: Requirements for Investigations – Stages
(5 responses), security managers (3 responses), security ana- Stage Percentage
lyst (1 response) and other (17 responses). The participants During the problem definition/analysis phase 46.4%
During the solution development phase 19.1%
indicated that they were experienced professionals, with 75
During the testing or evaluation phase 29.8%
(79.8%) out of the 94 respondents stating that they had more
Post-delivery 47.6%
than 10 years experience in an IT-based job role. More than Don’t Know 1.1%
Other 1.1%
three quarters of the participants came from Europe (57%) and
North America (25%). The remaining participants included 9% An aggregate analysis of these two questions presents an
from Asia, 3% each from the Middle East and Africa, 2% from interesting view of the results. 16 out of the 94 respondents
South America and 1% from Central America. indicated that their organisation consider all four of the re-
The participants represented a diverse set of industries quirements in Table I. These 16 respondents also indicated that
including Information Technology (47%), Financial Services their organisations consider these requirements in the problem
(12%), Telecommunications (6%), Aerospace (5%), and Gov- definition/analysis and solution phases. In other words, organ-
ernment (5%). We then asked the participants about their isations that are considering all the requirements in Table I are
experience with requirements management. Nearly 98% of discussing them early on in the development process.
the participants indicated that they had been involved in the We then asked the participants, who had indicated in the
elicitation of software requirements and just over 77% indi- previous question that their organisation considered require-
cated that they had been involved in the elicitation of security ments for investigations, about the stakeholders involved in
requirements. The following subsections present our survey these requirements. The results are presented in Table III, with
findings from the perspective of considering requirements for the participants able to select more than one option. The table
investigations and forensics data, as well as identifying the shows that a variety of stakeholders are involved in the consid-
practitioner’s perspective on these types of requirements. eration of these requirements. This includes software/system

| Requirementstoassistwith    | Yes   | No    | DNK   |
|:----------------------------|:------|:------|:------|
| thedetectionofincidents     | 63.8% | 33%   | 3.2%  |
| theinvestigationofincidents | 34%   | 60.7% | 5.3%  |
| theeradicationofincidents   | 28.7% | 63.8% | 7.5%  |
| therecoveryfromincidents    | 36.2% | 58.5% | 5.3%  |

| Stage                                    | Percentage   |
|:-----------------------------------------|:-------------|
| Duringtheproblemdefinition/analysisphase | 46.4%        |
| Duringthesolutiondevelopmentphase        | 19.1%        |
| Duringthetestingorevaluationphase        | 29.8%        |
| Post-delivery                            | 47.6%        |
| Don’tKnow                                | 1.1%         |
| Other                                    | 1.1%         |

engineers (41.7%), software/project managers (39.3%) and stakeholder involvement. The responses to this query are
security engineers (41.2%). However, the participants indi- presented in Table V, with respondents able to select more
cated that other types of stakeholders are also involved in than one option. Similar to the findings discussed in Section
this process. For example, nearly 35% of the respondents IV-A, the respondents indicated that numerous stakeholders are
indicated that security incident response team members are involved in the elicitation of these requirements. These include
involved in the elicitation of these requirements within their software/system engineers (34.8%), software/project managers
organisation. These individuals are usually responsible for (27%), security managers (30.3%), security engineers (31.5%)
conducting investigations within organisations [6]. The most and security incident response teams (22.5%). An analysis of
common answer from the ‘Other’ responses was ‘business the ‘Other’ (10.1%) responses revealed that ‘other’ stakehold-
analyst’, with four respondents indicating this was the case. ers include legal and regulatory officers, software architects
and governance teams. This indicates that these requirements
TABLE III: Requirements for Investigations – Stakeholders
are not just forensic goals, but legal, regulatory and governance
Stakeholder Percentage goals as well.
Customers 21.4%
End-Users 22.6% TABLE V: Requirements for Forensic Data – Stakeholders
Software/Systems Engineers 41.7%
Stakeholder Percentage
Software/Project Managers 39.3%
Customers 14.6%
Security Analysts 44.1%
End-Users 11.3%
Security Engineers 41.2%
Software/Systems Engineers 34.8%
Security Managers 41.2%
Software/Project Managers 27%
Security Incident Response Team Members 34.5%
Security Analysts 36%
Others 6.4%
Security Engineers 31.5%
Security Managers 30.3%
B. Requirements for Forensic Data Security Incident Response Team Members 22.5%
Other 10.1%
In order to examine the causes of an incident, investigators
After identifying the associated stakeholders, we then asked
need access to forensic data [5]. Hence, we proceeded to ask
the participants where these requirements were first integrated
questions surrounding the consideration of requirements for
in the development process. The results are shown in Table
the availability, collection, secure storage, tamper-proofing and
VI, with respondents able to select more than one answer.
examination of data for forensics. Table IV summarises the
participant’s answers to these questions.
TABLE VI: Requirements for Forensic Data – Stages
Stage Percentage
TABLE IV: Consideration of Requirements for Forensic Data
During the problem definition/analysis phase 42.7%
Requirements for the... Yes No DNK During the solution development phase 18%
availability of data for investigations 56.4% 43.6% 0% During the testing or evaluation phase 19.1%
collection of data for investigations 23.4% 71.3% 5.3% Post-delivery 27%
secure storage of data for investigations 31.9% 63.8% 4.3% Don’t Know 2.2%
tamper-proofing forensic data 28.7% 63.8% 7.5% Other 2.2%
examination of forensic data 25.5% 69.2% 5.3%
The responses to this question shows that organisations
The table shows that more than half of the respondents
appear to consider such requirements throughout the de-
indicated that their organisation consider requirements about
velopment lifecycle. In summary, 42.7% of the participants
the availability of forensic data. However, if forensic data is
indicated that these requirements are considered during the
to be used during an investigation, it needs to be collected
problem definition/analysis phase, while 27% indicated that
and stored correctly [4]. Just over 23% of the respondents
their organisations consider such requirements post-delivery.
indicated that their organisation considers requirements to
C. Practitioner’s Perception of Requirements for Forensics
assist with the collection of forensic data, while approximately
32% of the respondents stated that their organisation considers In order to examine how practitioners characterise require-
requirements to assist with the secure storage of forensics data. ments for forensics, we then asked the participants to rate
Before an investigator can collect forensic data related to the requirements presented in Table I and Table IV on a 3-
an incident, malicious actors can modify this data thereby point scale of: “Security Requirement”, “Mixture of Secu-
influencing the outcome of any future investigation [4]. Re- rity Requirement and Something Different” and “Something
quirements to prevent the tampering of forensic data could be Different from a Security Requirement”. The results are pre-
one solution to this problem. Around 29% of respondents indi- sented in Figure 1 with the values presented rounded to the
cated that their organisations consider requirements to prevent nearest percentage. The figure shows that for eight out of the
the tampering of forensic data. Moreover, approximately 25% nine requirements, the most common answer was “Something
of the respondents indicated that their organisation considers Different from a Security Requirement”. With regard to the
requirements to assist with the examination of data. remaining requirement (Detection of Security Incidents), the
We then proceeded to ask the participants, who indicated most common answer provided was a “Mixture of Security
that their organisation considered these requirements about Requirement and Something Different”.

| Stakeholder                         | Percentage   |
|:------------------------------------|:-------------|
| Customers                           | 21.4%        |
| End-Users                           | 22.6%        |
| Software/SystemsEngineers           | 41.7%        |
| Software/ProjectManagers            | 39.3%        |
| SecurityAnalysts                    | 44.1%        |
| SecurityEngineers                   | 41.2%        |
| SecurityManagers                    | 41.2%        |
| SecurityIncidentResponseTeamMembers | 34.5%        |
| Others                              | 6.4%         |

| Stakeholder                         | Percentage   |
|:------------------------------------|:-------------|
| Customers                           | 14.6%        |
| End-Users                           | 11.3%        |
| Software/SystemsEngineers           | 34.8%        |
| Software/ProjectManagers            | 27%          |
| SecurityAnalysts                    | 36%          |
| SecurityEngineers                   | 31.5%        |
| SecurityManagers                    | 30.3%        |
| SecurityIncidentResponseTeamMembers | 22.5%        |
| Other                               | 10.1%        |

| Stage                                    | Percentage   |
|:-----------------------------------------|:-------------|
| Duringtheproblemdefinition/analysisphase | 42.7%        |
| Duringthesolutiondevelopmentphase        | 18%          |
| Duringthetestingorevaluationphase        | 19.1%        |
| Post-delivery                            | 27%          |
| Don’tKnow                                | 2.2%         |
| Other                                    | 2.2%         |

| Requirementsforthe...                | Yes   | No    | DNK   |
|:-------------------------------------|:------|:------|:------|
| availabilityofdataforinvestigations  | 56.4% | 43.6% | 0%    |
| collectionofdataforinvestigations    | 23.4% | 71.3% | 5.3%  |
| securestorageofdataforinvestigations | 31.9% | 63.8% | 4.3%  |
| tamper-proofingforensicdata          | 28.7% | 63.8% | 7.5%  |
| examinationofforensicdata            | 25.5% | 69.2% | 5.3%  |

Fig. 1: Characterising Requirements for Forensics of the individuals on this social network within the specific
groups that were targeted. This threat is partly alleviated
Security	Req.	 Security	Req.	&	Something	Different	 Something	Different	From	a	Security	Req.	
due to the selection of groups on LinkedIn that focused on
requirements and software engineering, information security
Detec3on	of	Security	Incidents	 27%	 38%	 35%	
and digital forensics. A potential threat to external validity, is
Assist	with	Inves3ga3on	of	Security	Incidents	 18%	 32%	 50%	
that we only obtained 94 answers from practitioners. Never-
Eradica3on	of	Security	Incidents	 25%	 28%	 47%	
theless, these individuals experience, industries and job roles
Recovery	from	Security	Incidents	 18%	 35%	 47%	
are widespread and we are confident that our results present a
Availability	of	Data	for	Forensic	Inves3ga3ons	 25%	 32%	 43%	
broad representation of requirements for forensics practices
Prevent	Tampering	of	Data	and	Logs		 23%	 26%	 51%	 within organisations. With regard to reliability, the survey
Collec3on	of	Data	and	Logs		 19%	 25%	 56%	 data was analysed independently, first by the primary author
Secure	Storage	of	Data	and	Logs		 24%	 26%	 50%	 and then the secondary author. This also provided consistency
Examina3on	of	Data	and	Logs	 16%	 25%	 59%	 regarding the analysis of the data.
V. RESEARCH CHALLENGES
In addition to the above queries, the respondents were
Our findings, coupled with the results from the literature
provided with a definition of digital forensics and asked
review has prompted the identification of several research
“does your organisation elicit requirements for digital forensics
challenges, which we discuss below.
during its development lifecycle?”. The purpose of this ques-
1) Elicitation of Requirements for Forensics: Our findings
tion was to evaluate the respondent’s awareness surrounding
show that organisations consider requirements for forensics
requirements for forensics based on the previous questions.
during various stages in the development process, including
In response, 23.4% stated that their organisation does elicit
post-delivery. As software engineering researchers and practi-
requirements for forensics. However, 71.3% indicated that
tioners [30] have discussed, non-functional requirements (e.g.
their organisation does not elicit such requirements, while
requirements for forensics) can impact a software system’s
5.3% provided ‘do not know’ answers. Examining the ‘No’
architecture. Hence, we propose that organisations consider
answers with the answers provided to questions described in
requirements for forensics at the start of development pro-
Sections IV-A and IV-B presents an interesting observation.
cess. However, techniques for eliciting and analysing these
49 of the respondents (73%) who provided ‘No’ answers to
requirements have not actually been proposed in the literature.
the above question, indicated in previous questions that their
Therefore, there is also a need to examine if existing elicitation
organisation did consider requirements for investigations and
techniques can be used for ‘forensic requirements’.
forensic data. These findings could indicate limited digital
2) Stakeholder Analysis for ‘Forensic Requirements’:
forensics awareness among the participants.
Our analysis of the literature and survey findings have indi-
D. Threats to Validity
cated that a variety of stakeholders are likely to be involved
Our empirical study involved 94 respondents in order to in the consideration of requirements for forensics. Previous
assess the extent to which requirements for forensics are work [31] has argued that the effective consultation of relevant
considered within organisations and to identify research chal- stakeholders is very important in the requirements engineering
lenges that emerge from this work. However, with research of process. We envision that the same would apply to stakehold-
this nature there is a need to evaluate the threats to validity, ers involved in ‘forensic requirements’. Hence, there is a need
which we analysed using a scheme presented by Runeson, to investigate how these differing interests and demands in
et al. [15]. From a construct validity perspective, it must be requirements for forensics can be accommodated from these
acknowledged that there is a possibility that the respondents multidisciplinary stakeholders.
did not fully understand the questions or chose to respond 3) Evaluating the Impact of Laws and Regulations on
arbitrarily. To mitigate this threat, the survey was validated Requirements for Forensics: Previous work [32] has argued
by three academic researchers and two software engineering that different laws and regulations can impact the elicitation of
professionals. The researchers were within the domains of compliance requirements. However, further research is needed
requirements engineering, security and digital forensics, while to examine how these conflicts could influence requirements
the two professionals are employed in organisations that are for forensics. For example, the Cybersecurity Information
involved in software development. The validation was done Sharing Act in the United States could conflict with European
by taking the survey and providing feedback, which was then data protection regulations. Hence elicitation approaches for
used to improve question phrasing and adding answer options. ‘forensic requirements’ could also need to take into account
In addition, we included validation questions in the survey laws and regulations from multiple jurisdictions.
and have only reported responses from the respondents who 4) Forensics Trade-off Analysis: The differing viewpoints
correctly answered those questions. from which requirements for forensics can be elicited could
In terms of internal validity, it must be acknowledged that inevitably cause conflicts. As a result, engineering forensic-
we relied on LinkedIn to recruit survey participants. Hence, ready systems is likely to require trading off ‘forensic require-
the results obtained in the survey may reflect only the opinion ments’ with other requirements, such as security and privacy.

|     | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   |
|:----|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|
| 27% | 38%    |        |        |        |        |        | 35%    |
|     |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| 18% | 32%    |        |        | 50%    |        |        |        |
|     |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| 25% | 28%    |        |        |        | 47%    |        |        |
|     |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| 18% | 35%    |        |        |        | 47%    |        |        |
|     |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| 25% | 32%    |        |        |        |        | 43%    |        |
|     |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| 23% | 26%    |        |        | 51%    |        |        |        |
|     |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| 19% | 25%    |        | 56%    |        |        |        |        |
|     |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| 24% | 26%    |        |        | 50%    |        |        |        |
|     |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |
| 16% | 25%    | 59%    |        |        |        |        |        |
|     |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |

Therefore, there is a need to first, examine the applicability of ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
existing trade-off techniques [33] to support forensics trade-
This work was partially supported by SFI Grants No.
off analysis and second, if required, develop new techniques
13/RC/2094 and 15/SIRG/3501 and ERC Advanced Grant. No.
to support trade-off analysis between ‘forensic requirements’
291652 (ASAP).
and other requirements.
REFERENCES
5) Addressing System Performance Overhead in Forensic-
by-Design: Multiple authors have discussed the concept of [1] R. Klahr, S. Amili, J. N. Shah, M. Button, and V. Wang, “Cyber Security
Breaches Survey,” MORI Social Research Institute, Tech. Rep., 2016.
‘system forensic readiness’ as a means of implementing foren-
[2] Ponemon Institute, “Global report on the cost of cyber crime,” 2015.
sic readiness [8], [9], [20], [22], [23]. Inline with the concept
[3] G. Grispos, W. B. Glisson, and T. Storer, “Rethinking security incident
of ‘system forensic readiness’, we envision that system perfor- response: The integration of agile principles,” in AMCIS, 2014.
[4] E. Casey, Digital evidence and computer crime: Forensic science,
mance challenges could emerge when implementing require-
computers, and the internet. Academic press, 2011.
ments for forensics. For example, one specific requirement
[5] B. Carrier and E. H. Spafford, “Getting physical with the digital
could involve intensified logging of user activity, which could investigation process,” International Journal of Digital Evidence, 2003.
[6] G. Grispos, W. Glisson, and T. Storer, “Security incident response
result in increased overhead and reduced system performance.
criteria: A practitioner’s perspective,” in AMCIS, 2015.
Hence, existing research needs to be extended to analyse the
[7] P. Stephenson, “Conducting incident post mortems,” Computer Fraud &
system performance challenges that could emerge due to the Security, vol. 2003, no. 4, pp. 16–19, 2003.
[8] R. Rowlingson, “A ten step process for forensic readiness,” International
implementation of ‘forensic requirements’.
Journal of Digital Evidence, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–28, 2004.
6) Assessing the Influence of Forensic-by-Design on [9] J. Tan, “Forensic readiness,” Cambridge, MA:@ Stake, pp. 1–23, 2001.
the Forensic Readiness Ecosystem: We define a forensic [10] K. Reddy and H. S. Venter, “The architecture of a digital forensic
readiness management system,” Computers & Security, 2013.
readiness ecosystem as the different elements and approaches
[11] N. H. Ab Rahman, W. B. Glisson, Y. Yang, and K.-K. R. Choo,
that an organisation can implement to become forensic-ready. “Forensic-by-design framework for cyber-physical cloud systems,” IEEE
This can include implementing policies and processes, align- Cloud Comp., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 50–59, 2016.
[12] D. Mink, A. Yasinsac, K.-K. R. Choo, and W. B. Glisson, “Next
ing technology with forensic aims and training employees.
generation aircraft architecture and digital forensic,” in AMCIS, 2016.
However, existing research has overlooked the impact of [13] F. Shull, J. Singer, and D. I. Sjøberg, Guide to advanced empirical
forensic-by-design on this forensic readiness ecosystem. For software engineering. Springer, 2008, vol. 93.
[14] Limeservice. [Online]. Available: https://www.limeservice.com/en/
example, an organisation may need to enhance its policies and
[15] R. Rosnow and R. Rosenthal, Case Study Research in Software Engi-
procedures based on the requirements it will consider during neering: Guidelines and Example. John Wiley and Sons, 2012.
the engineering of forensic-ready systems. Hence, empirical [16] G. Grispos, “On the enhancement of data quality in security incident
response investigations,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Glasgow, 2016.
studies are needed to assess the impact of forensic-by-design
[17] F. Freiling and B. Schwittay, “A common process model for incident
on the wider forensic readiness ecosystem. response and digital forensics,” in IMF, 2007.
[18] G. Grispos, W. B. Glisson, and T. Storer, “Cloud security challenges:
Investigating policies, standards, and guidelines in a fortune 500 orga-
VI. CONCLUSIONS
nization,” in 21st European Conference on Information Systems, 2013.
[19] S. Harris, CISSP all-in-one exam guide. McGraw-Hill, Inc., 2010.
In this paper, we undertook an online survey targeting indus- [20] D. Barske, A. Stander, and J. Jordaan, “A digital forensic readiness
try practitioners to assess and understand the extent to which framework for south african sme’s,” in 2010 ISSA, 2010, pp. 1–6.
[21] B. Endicott-Popovsky, D. A. Frincke, and C. A. Taylor, “A theoretical
requirements for forensics are recognised explicitly and imple-
framework for organizational network forensic readiness,” Journal of
mented within organisations. The survey results suggest that Computers, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–11, 2007.
although organisations appear to consider such requirements, [22] A. Pooe and L. Labuschagne, “A conceptual model for digital forensic
readiness,” in 2012 Information Security for South Africa, 2012, pp. 1–8.
a number of inconsistencies emerge. These inconsistencies
[23] A.YasinsacandY.Manzano,“Policiestoenhancecomputerandnetwork
include when such requirements are actually introduced in forensics,” in Workshop on Information Assurance and Security, 2001.
the development process, as well as the stakeholders involved [24] C. Grobler and C. Louwrens, “Digital forensic readiness as a component
of information security best practice,” in SEC, 2007.
in their elicitation. Our analysis, coupled with a literature
[25] K.ReddyandH.Venter,“Aforensicframeworkforhandlinginformation
review on forensic readiness, led us to recognise a number privacy incidents,” in IFIP Int. Conf. on Digital Forensics, 2009.
of research challenges for the explicit elicitation, analysis and [26] E. Casey, “Case study: network intrusion investigation–lessons in foren-
sic preparation,” Digital Investigation, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 254–260, 2005.
implementation of such requirements. Future work intends to
[27] M. Dlamini, H. Venter, J. Eloff, and M. Eloff, “Requirements for
further examine and validate our findings. This will be done preparing the cloud to become ready for digital forensic investigation,”
through in-depth interviews with practitioners identified in this in ECCWS 2014, 2014.
[28] S. A. Hoolachan and W. B. Glisson, “Organizational handling of digital
survey as well as empirical case studies to further investigate
evidence,” in Conf. on Digital Forensics, Security & Law, 2010, p. 33.
organisational forensic-by-design practices. Future work also [29] N. H. Ab Rahman, N. D. W. Cahyani, and K.-K. R. Choo, “Cloud
intends to explore the possibility of using existing approaches incident handling and forensic-by-design: cloud storage as a case study,”
Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, 2016.
that are currently used to elicit security and legal requirements
[30] L. Chung, B. A. Nixon, E. Yu, and J. Mylopoulos, Non-functional
in a ‘forensic requirements’ context. Any proposed solution requirements in software engineering. Springer, 2012.
will also need to take into account the integration of ‘forensic [31] H. Sharp, A. Finkelstein, and G. Galal, “Stakeholder identification in
the requirements engineering process,” in DEXA, 1999.
requirements’ into agile software development, techniques to
[32] J. Garc´ıa-Gala´n, L. Pasquale, G. Grispos, and B. Nuseibeh, “Towards
identify conflicts between requirements for forensics with adaptive compliance,” in SEAMS, 2016.
other requirements and support trade-off analysis. [33] J. Karlsson, “Software requirements prioritizing,” in RE Conf., 1996.