ASIAN OPTION PRICING UNDER UNCERTAIN VOLATILITY
MODEL
8102 guA 2  ]RP.nif-q[  1v65600.8081:viXra
YUE-CAI HAN AND CHUN-YANG LIU
Abstract.
In this paper, we study the asymptotic behavior of Asian option
prices in the worst case scenario under an uncertain volatility model. We give a
procedure to approximate the Asian option prices with a small volatility interval.
By imposing additional conditions on the boundary condition and cutting the
obtained Black-Scholes-Barenblatt equation into two Black-Scholes-like equations,
we obtain an approximation method to solve the fully nonlinear PDE.
Key Words: Asian option, nonlinear Black-Scholes-Barenblatt PDE, uncertain
volatility model, stochastic control
Introduction
1.
An option on a traded account is a financial contract which allows the buyer of
the contract obtains the right to trade an underlying asset for a specified price,
called strike price, during the life of the option. There are varieties of options, such
as European option, American option, Asian option and barrier option. As the
foundations for the modern analysis of options, the Black-Scholes-Merton pricing
formula for European option was introduced by Black, Scholes [1] and Merton [2].
In Blcak-Scholes-Merton model, the volatility is assumed to be constant. However,
constant volatility cannot explain observed market prices for options.
After Black, Scholes and Merton’s work, some scholars studied option pricing
models with stochastic volatility. In a series of papers, several models for stochastic
volatility were introduced, such as Hull-White stochastic volatility model [3] and
Heston stochastic volatility model [4].
Uncertain volatility model is another approach to describe the non-constant volatil-
ity. In 1995, uncertain volatility model was introduced by Lyons [5] and Avellaneda
et al. [6]. In these models, volatility is assumed to lie within a range of values. So the
prices are no longer unique. We can only get the best-case scenario prices and the
worst-case scenario prices. Several problems about uncertain volatility have been
studied. We can see these results in Lyons [5], Avellaneda et al. [6], Dokuchaev,
Savkin [7], Forsyth, Vetzal [8] and Vorbrink [9]. Pricing in uncertain volatility
1

2 YUE-CAI HAN AND CHUN-YANG LIU
models involving nonlinear partial differential equations have been showed in their
paper. Some numerical methods have been proposed in Pooley, Forsyth, Vetzal[10],
and Avellaneda et al. [6].
In 2014, Fouque and Ren [11] studied the price of European derivatives in the
worst case scenario under the uncertain volatility model. They provided an approx-
imate method of pricing the derivatives with a small volatility interval. In addition,
the paper also presented that the solution reduces to a constant volatility problem
when it comes to simple options with convex payoffs.
In this paper, the pricing problem of Asian options is studied. The payoff function
is path-dependent on risky asset price processes. Another variable is given to solve
the problem. In the process of finding the estimation of the worst case scenario
Asian option prices, the first problem that we meet is obtaining the Hamilton-
Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation of the prices. The HJB equation is called Black-
Scholes-Barenblatt (BSB) equation in the financial mathematics. We can get the
BSB equation by the stochastic control theory. The next difficulty is to proof the
convergence of the estimation. To control the error term, we obtain its expectation
form by Dynkin formula and find what conditions should we impose on the payoff
function by proving and deducing. Finally, we get the approximation procedure for
the prices. Compare with Fouque and Ren’s paper [11], we add an equation in the
stochastic control system and it can also be reflected in the BSB equation. In terms
of the dynamic of the risky asset price process, we give an equation to describe
the path-dependence. When estimate the expectation form, We use the relationship
between the two processes. In section 4.4, we fix one of two variables first to simplify
the problem. Another method we used to manage the two variables is changing the
form of the BSB equation.
The organization of this paper is as follows. In section 2, we briefly describe Asian
options under uncertain volatility model and give the Black-Scholes-Barenblatt (BSB)
equations of option prices. In section 3, we find the estimation of Asian option prices
in the worst case scenario and the estimation is relied on two Black-Scholes-like
PDEs. Next, we propose the main result of this paper which shows the rationality
of estimation. In section 4, we give the proof of the main result. Through the con-
ditions imposed on the payoff function, we get the convergence of the error term. In
the process, we obtain the expectation form of the error term and it is cut into three
parts. The controls of the three parts are given by the stochastic control theory and

3
the properties of the worst-case scenario Asian option price process. Finally, we give
the conclusion of this paper.
Asian options under uncertain volatility model
2.
In this section, we introduce the Asian options under uncertain volatility model.
Then we give the Black-Scholes-Barenblatt (BSB) equation of the Asian options’
prices. Suppose that X is an Asian option written on the risky asset with maturity
T and payoff ϕ(·). ϕ(·) is a non-convex function and the result is identical to Black-
Scholes result under convex condition. That is to say, the results of this article cover
generalized Asian options.
Assume that the price process of the risky asset X solves the following stochastic
t
differential equation
(2.1) dX = rX dt + σ X dW ,
t t t t t
where r is the constant risk-free interest rate, W is a standard Brownian motion
t
(Ω,F,P
on the probability space ) and the volatility process σ ∈ A[σ,σ] for each
t
t ∈ [0,T], which is a family of progressively measurable and [σ,σ]-valued processes.
By the definition as above, we know that the volatility in an uncertain volatility
model is not a stochastic process with a probability distribution, but a family of
stochastic processes with unknown prior information. Thus, what can we use to
distinguish the difference between uncertain volatility models is the model ambiguity.
Due to the path-dependence on risky asset price processes, we assume that Y
t,T
satisfies the expression as follows
Y − Y
T t
(2.2) Y = ,
t,T
T − t
t
where Y = X du.
t u
0
Then we can get Asian option prices in the worst case scenario price at time t < T
R
as follows
(2.3) V (t,X ,Y ) = exp(−r(T − t)) esssup E[ϕ(Y )|F ],
t t 0,T t
σ∈A[σ,σ]
where esssup is essential supremum. By the ambiguity of the uncertain volatility
model, we obtain the definition of price as equation (2.3). Obviously, the worst case
scenario price is for the seller of options. It is related to coherent risk measure which
quantifies the model risk induced by volatility uncertainty (see [12]). Moreover,
the model ambiguity in mathematical finance has captured the attention of many.
Therefore, we should pay attention to the importance of the worst case prices.

4 YUE-CAI HAN AND CHUN-YANG LIU
Through the stochastic control theory (see [13]), V (t,X ,Y ) satisfies the Hamilton-
t t
Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation (Black-Scholes-Barenblatt (BSB) equation).
Lemma 2.1. V (t,X ,Y ) satisfies the following Black-Scholes-Barenblatt equation
t t
∂ V + r(x∂ V − V ) + x∂ V + sup 1 x2σ2∂2 V = 0,
t x y 2 xx
σ∈A[σ,σ]
(2.4)
 0 ≤ t ≤(cid:2)T, x ≥ 0, y(cid:3) ≥ 0,
 y
 V (T,x,y) = ϕ( ), x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0.
T
Proof. No tice that the stochastic control system is
dX = rX dt + σ X dW , σ ∈ A[σ,σ],
t t t t t t
dY = X dt.
t t
(cid:26)
Then for all (s,x,y) ∈ [0,T] × R+ × R+, we first establish the dynamic program
frame
dX = rX dt + σ X dW ,
t t t t t
dY = X dt,
t t
(2.5) 
X = x,
 s


Y = y.
s
The cost function is 


−r(T−s)
J(s,x,y;σ) = E e ϕ(Y ) ,
s 0,T
h i
where E [·] = E[·|F ]. The value function is
s s
V (s,x,y) = esssup J(s,x,y;σ).
σ∈A[σ,σ]
For all 0 ≤ s ≤ sˆ ≤ T, σ ∈ A[σ,σ], we have
−r(T−s)
V (s,x,y) ≥ E e ϕ(Y )
s 0,T
h sˆ i
−r(T−t) −r(T−sˆ)
= E −re ϕdt + e ϕ .
s
s
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
Then we obtain
sˆ
−r(T−t)
0 ≥ E −re ϕdt + V (sˆ,x,y) − V (s,x,y).
s
s
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
Divided by s − s on both sides of the inequality, we have that
sˆ −re−r(T−t)ϕdt
V (sˆ,x,y) − V (s,x,y)
0 ≥ E s + .
b s
sˆ− s sˆ− s
"R #
Here, assume that ϕ is Lipschitz continuous. Then according to Itˆo formula and
equations (2.5), we obtain
1 1 1
dV = V dt + V dX + V dY + V dX dX + V dY dY + V dX dY
t x t y t xx t t yy t t xy t t
2 2 2
1
2 2
= (V + rX V + X V + σ X V )dt + σ X V dW .
t t x t y t t xx t t x t
2

5
Let sˆ → s. For all σ ∈ A[σ,σ], we have that
1
−r(T−s) 2 2
0 ≥ −rE [e ϕ] + V + rX V + X V + σ X V
s t s x s y s s xx
2
1
2 2
≥ −rV (s,x,y) + V (s,x,y) + rxV (s,x,y) + xV (s,x,y) + σ X V (s,x,y),
t x y s s xx
2
which is
1
2 2
(2.6) 0 ≥ −rV + V + rxV + xV + sup σ x V .
t x y xx
2
σ∈A[σ,σ]
On the other hand, for any ε > 0, there is σ(ε) ∈ A[σ,σ] such that
−r(T−s)
V (s,x,y) − ε(sˆ− s) ≤ E e ϕ
s
h sˆ i
−r(T−t) −r(T−sˆ)
= E −re ϕdt + E e ϕ .
s s
s
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
h i
So we have that
sˆ −re−r(T−t)ϕdt
V (sˆ,x,y) − V (s,x,y)
−ε ≤ E s + .
s
sˆ− s sˆ− s
"R #
Argument as above, we obtain
1
2 2
(2.7) 0 ≤ −rV + V + rxV + xV + sup σ x V .
t x y xx
2
σ∈A[σ,σ]
Combining (2.6) with (2.7), we have
1
2 2
0 = −rV + V + rxV + xV + sup σ x V .
t x y xx
2
σ∈A[σ,σ]
(cid:3)
Remark 2.2. Here, adding variable Y into dynamical system leads to a more com-
plex stochastic control system, which adds the dimensionality of the BSB equation.
Remark 2.3. Notice that, (2.4) is a fully nonlinear PDE which doesn’t have a solu-
tion like Black-Scholes equation. Thus, we decide to solve the problem by reducing
it to solving two Black-Scholes-like PDEs.
Black-Scholes-like PDEs and Main Result
3.
In this section, we first reparameterize the uncertain volatility model to study the
prices in the worst case scenario. Assume that the risky asset price process Xε has
t
a dynamic
dXε = rXεdt + σ XεdW ,
(3.1) t t t t t
dY ε = Xεdt,
t t
(cid:26)

6 YUE-CAI HAN AND CHUN-YANG LIU
where σ ∈ Aε ={σ |σ is a [σ ,σ +ε]−valued processively measurable process} and
t t t 0 0
σ ∈ [σ,σ].
0
The cost function is
ε −r(T−t) ε
J (t,x,y;σ) = e E ϕ(Y ) ,
txy 0,T
where E [·] means the conditional expectation (cid:2) taken w(cid:3) ith respect to Xε = x,
txy t
Y ε = y. The value function is
t
ε ε
V (t,x,y;σ) = esssup [J (t,x,y;σ)].
ε
σ∈A
By Lemma 2.1 we get the following Black-Scholes-Barenblatt equation of V ε.
∂ V ε + r(x∂ V ε − V ε) + x∂ V ε + sup 1 x2σ2∂2 V ε = 0,
t x y 2 xx
ε
σ∈A
(3.2)
 0 ≤ t ≤ T, x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0,
  V ε(T,x,y) = ϕ( y ), x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0,
T
which is equivalent to

∂ V ε + r(x∂ V ε − V ε) + x∂ V ε + sup 1 x2(σ + εγ)2∂2 V ε = 0,
t x y 2 0 xx
γ∈A[0,1]
(3.3)
 0 ≤ t ≤ T, x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0,
  V ε(T,x,y) = ϕ( y ), x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0,
T
where  A[0,1] ={γ t|γ is a [0,1]−valued processively measurable process}.
t
It is obvious that the worst case scenario price is larger than any Black-Scholes
price with a constant volatility σ ∈ [σ,σ]. We will show that the worst case scenario
0
price of Asian option converges to its Black-Scholes price with constant volatility σ
0
in following section. In addition, the rate of convergence of the Asian option prices
as the volatility interval shrinks to a single point can be obtained. Then we can
get the estimation of the prices through this result when the interval is sufficiently
small.
Let V be the Black-Scholes prices, V 0 = V ε| , V = ∂ V ε| . Now, we suppose
0 ε=0 1 ε ε=0
that V ε is continuous with respect to ε. Then, by the continuity of V ε and equation
(2.3), we have V = V 0 = V ε| . It’s well known that V satisfies the following
0 ε=0 0
partial differential equation.
∂ V + r(x∂ V − V ) + x∂ V + 1 σ2x2∂2 V = 0,
t 0 x 0 0 y 0 2 0 xx 0
(3.4) 0 ≤ t ≤ T, x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0,

y
V (T,x,y) = ϕ( ), x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0.
 0 T
On the other hand, we have V = ∂ V ε| , which is the rate of convergence of
 1 ε ε=0
the Asian option prices as ε approaches 0. To obtain the equation characterizing V ,
1
we differentiate both sides of equations (3.3) with respect to ε and let ε = 0, then

7
we have that
∂ V + r(x∂ V − V ) + x∂ V + 1 σ2x2∂2 V + sup γσ x2∂2 V = 0,
t 1 x 1 1 y 1 2 0 xx 1 0 xx 0
γ∈A[0,1]
(3.5)
 0 ≤ t ≤ T, x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0,

 V (T,x,y) = 0, x ≥ 0, y ≥ 0.
1
Now, we have two Black-Scholes-like PDEs as above. Next, we want to find the

connection between V ε and V , V . Then we try to prove if we can impose additional
0 1
conditions on the payoff function to make the error term V ε −(V +εV ) be of order
0 1
◦(ε). That is to say, the estimation of the worst case scenario Asian option prices
will approach the truth-value as the model ambiguity vanishes. It will also show us
a method to estimate the worst case Asian option prices. By the deducing in the
next section, we get following theorem which is the main result of this paper.
Theorem 3.1. Assume that ϕ ∈ C2(R+) is Lipschitz continuous, and the second
p
derivative of ϕ is continuous. Then
V ε − (V + εV )
0 1
lim = 0.
ε
ε↓0
Here ϕ ∈ C2(R+) means that its derivatives up to order 2 have polynomial growth.
p
Remark 3.2. To prove the theorem 3.1, there are some difficulties. The first one is
how to convert the error term into an estimable form. We get its expectation form
and cut it into three parts in next section. The second difficulty is how to estimate
the three parts. We will use the stochastic control theory, the zero set property of
the equation (4.1), the properties of the sublinear expectation[14] and the properties
of the worst case scenario Asian option price processes.
Remark 3.3. By theorem 3.1, we can compute Asian option price V ε(t,Xε,Y ε)
t t
with its approximation, V (t,Xε,Y ε) + εV (t,Xε,Y ε), where V (t,Xε,Y ε) is the
0 t t 1 t t 0 t t
Black-Scholes price of Asian option and V (t,Xε,Y ε) can be numerically computed
1 t t
by a simple difference scheme according to (3.5).(see [10])
Remark 3.4. Notice that (3.4) and (3.5) are independent of ε. So when we compute
V ε with different ε, we just need to compute V and V once for all small values of
0 1
ε by Theorem 3.1.
The proof of the main result
4.
In this section, we try to control the error term to prove that we can compute V ε
with its estimation V + εV . As the conditions imposed on ϕ which mentioned in
0 1

8 YUE-CAI HAN AND CHUN-YANG LIU
Theorem 3.1, we have following process of proof. On the other hand, our thinking
process is also reflected in the next parts.
4.1. The Lipschitz continuity of payoff function. From section 3 we know that
only with the continuity of V ε can we obtain the PDEs of V (= V ε| ) and V
0 ε=0 1
(= ∂ V ε| ). Thus, to get the continuity of V ε, we suppose that ϕ is Lipschitz
ε ε=0
continuous. Then, there exists a constant K such that
1
+
|ϕ(x) − ϕ(y)| ≤ K |x − y|, for all x 6= y, x,y ∈ R .
1
Thus, we have Lemma as follows.
Lemma 4.1. Assume that ϕ is Lipschitz continuous. Then V ε is continuous with
respect to ε.
Proof. Let 0 ≤ ε ≤ ε < 1. Notice that
0
ε −r(T−t) ε
V (t,x,y;σ) = esssup e E ϕ(Y ) .
txy 0,T
ε
σ∈A
n o
(cid:2) (cid:3)
We have that
r(T−t) ε ε
e V 0(t,x,y;σ) = esssup E ϕ(Y 0 (σ))
txy 0,T
ε
σ∈A 0
h i
ε
= esssup E ϕ(Y (σ ∧ (σ + ε ))) .
txy 0,T 0 0
ε
σ∈A
(cid:2) (cid:3)
By the Lipschitz continuity of ϕ and equation (2.1), there is a constant K such that
1
r(T−t) ε ε
e |V (t,x,y;σ) − V 0(t,x,y;σ)|
ε ε
≤ esssup E ϕ Y (σ) − E ϕ Y (σ ∧ (σ + ε ))
txy 0,T txy 0,T 0 0
ε
σ∈A
(cid:12) (cid:2) (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:12)
1/2
(cid:12) ε ε 2 (cid:12)
≤ K esssup E Y (σ) − Y (σ ∧ (σ + ε ))
1 txy 0,T 0,T 0 0
ε
σ∈A
(cid:16) (cid:17)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
1/2
(cid:12) T (cid:12)
ε ε 2
≤ (K /T) esssup E |X (σ) − X (σ ∧ (σ + ε ))| du .
1 txy u u 0 0
ε
σ∈A 0
(cid:18) Z (cid:19)
With the estimates of the moments of solutions of stochastic differential equations
(Theorem 9 in Section 2.9 and Corollary 12 in section 2.5 of [15]), there are constants
N = N(q,r,σ ), N′ = N′(q,r,σ ), and C = max{NN′, N + N′} such that
0 0
ε ε 2q
E sup|X (σ) − X (σ ∧ (σ + ε ))|
txy s s 0 0
s≤u
(cid:20) (cid:21)
u
q−1 Nu ε 2q 2q
≤ Nu e E |X (σ)| · |σ − σ ∧ (σ + ε )| ds
txy s s s s 0
0
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
′
q−1 Nu ′ N u 2q 2q
≤ Nu e N e u(1 + x )|ε − ε |
0
q Cu 2q 2q
= Cu e (1 + x )|ε − ε | .
0

9
Thus we have that
r(T−t) ε ε
e |V (t,x,y) − V 0(t,x,y)|
1/2
T
ε ε 2
≤ (K /T) esssup E sup |X (σ) − X (σ ∧ (σ + ε ))| du
1 txy u u 0 0
σ∈Aε   0 s∈[0,u] !
Z
1/2
T
Cu 2 2
≤ (K /T) esssup Cue (1 + x )|ε − ε | du
1 0
ε
σ∈A 0
(cid:18)Z (cid:19)
′ 2 1/2
≤ K (1 + x ) |ε − ε |,
1 0
where K′ = K′(K ,C,T).
1 1 1
Let ε → ε . We have that |V ε(t,x,y) − V ε 0(t,x,y)| → 0.
0
The continuity of V ε with respect to ε can be proved similarly when ε ≤ ε .
0
(cid:3)
4.2. Expectation form of the error term. In this part, we analyze the error term
and give its expectation form as preparation work before we prove the convergence
of V + εV .
0 1
Xˆε
Let σˆ be the worst case scenario volatility process and be the worst case
t t
scenario risky asset process. Then equations (3.1) can be rewritten as follows.
dXˆε rXˆεdt XˆεdW
= + σˆ ,
(4.1) t t t t t
dYˆε Xˆεdt.
=
(cid:26) t t
We can get the expression of σˆ by equations (3.3) and σˆ(ε) = σ + εγˆ, where
0
1, ∂2 V ε(t,x,y) ≥ 0,
(4.2) γˆ(t,x,y;ε) = xx
0, ∂2 V ε(t,x,y) < 0.
xx
(cid:26)
Similarly, by solving equations (3.5) of V , we have the volatility process: σ¯(ε) =
1
σ + εγ¯, where
0
1, ∂2 V (t,x,y) ≥ 0,
(4.3) γ¯(t,x,y) = xx 0
0, ∂2 V (t,x,y) < 0.
xx 0
(cid:26)
Here, we use the short notation γˆ and γ¯ for γˆ(t,x,y;ε) and γ¯(t,x,y).
t t
Let Zε = V ε − (V + εV ). To estimate the error term Zε, we define the operator
0 1
L(σ) = ∂ + rx∂ − r + 1 σ2x2∂2 + x∂ . According to partial differential equations
t x 2 xx y

10 YUE-CAI HAN AND CHUN-YANG LIU
(3.2), (3.4) and (3.5), we have that
ε ε
L(σˆ )Z = L(σˆ )(V − (V + εV ))
t t 0 1
= 0 − L(σˆ )(V + εV )
t 0 1
= −(L(σˆ ) − L(σ ))V − L(σ )V − ε(L(σˆ ) − L(σ ))V − εL(σ )V
t 0 0 0 0 t 0 1 0 1
2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
= ε(γ¯ − γˆ )σ x ∂ V − (ε /2)((γˆ ) x ∂ V + 2σ γˆ x ∂ V )
t t 0 xx 0 t xx 0 0 t xx 1
3 2 2 2
− (ε /2)(γˆ ) x ∂ V
t xx 1
ε
= −f (t,x,y),
with the boundary condition Zε(T) = V ε(T) − V (T) − εV (T) = 0.
0 1
We have the following expectation form of Zε by Dynkin formula.
T
ε ε
Z = E f (s,x,y)ds
txy
t
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
T
ˆε 2 2 ˆε ˆε
= εE (γˆ − γ¯ ) · σ · (X ) ∂ V (s,X ,Y )ds
txy s s 0 s xx 0 s s
t
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
T
1
2 2 ˆε 2 2 ˆε ˆε
+ε E { (γˆ ) (X ) ∂ V (s,X ,Y )
txy s s xx 0 s s
2
t
(cid:20)Z
ˆε 2 2 ˆε ˆε
+σ (γˆ )(X ) ∂ V (s,X ,Y )}ds
0 s s xx 1 s s
(cid:21)
T
1
3 2 ˆε 2 2 ˆε ˆε
+ε E (γˆ ) (X ) ∂ V (s,X ,Y )ds
txy s s xx 1 s s
2
t
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
2 3
= εI + ε I + ε I ,
1 2 3
where
T
ˆε 2 2 ˆε ˆε
(4.4) I = E (γˆ − γ¯ ) · σ · (X ) ∂ V (s,X ,Y )ds ,
1 txy s s 0 s xx 0 s s
t
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
T
1
2 ˆε 2 2 ˆε ˆε
I = E { (γˆ ) (X ) ∂ V (s,X ,Y )
2 txy s s xx 0 s s
2
t
(cid:20)Z
ˆε 2 2 ˆε ˆε
(4.5) +σ (γˆ )(X ) ∂ V (s,X ,Y )}ds ,
0 s s xx 1 s s
(cid:21)
T 1
2 ˆε 2 2 ˆε ˆε
(4.6) I = E (γˆ ) (X ) ∂ V (s,X ,Y )ds .
3 txy s s xx 1 s s
2
t
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
Thus we have that
ε 2 3
(4.7) |Z | ≤ ε|I | + ε |I | + ε |I |.
1 2 3
So we can estimate Zε by controlling |I |, |I | and |I |.
1 2 3

11
4.3. The polynomial growth condition of payoff function. From section 4.2,
we know that to control the error term, we need to analyze the three parts. By
(4.7), we have
Zε
≤ |I | + ε(|I | + ε|I |).
1 2 3
ε
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
Therefore, it is sufficient to prove
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
lim|I | + ε(|I | + ε|I |) = 0.
1 2 3
ε↓0
Obviously, it is necessary to give controls of |I | and |I |. When it comes to |I |,
2 3 1
we need to prove the convergence of it. Now, let us consider controlling |I | and |I |
2 3
first.
By the expressions of I and I , we can see that partial derivatives of V and V
2 3 0 1
are involved. Thus, we should consider to estimate them before giving the controls
of I and I .
2 3
Next, we can obtain the expectation form of V and V ε by the classical results.
0
When ε = 0, we have
σ2
0
X(u) = xexp{(r − )(u − t) + σ (W − W )}.
0 u t
2
Thus
−r(T−t)
V (t,x,y) = e E [ϕ(Y )]
0 txy 0,T
T
1
−r(T−t)
= e E ϕ X(u)du
txy
T
0
(4.8) (cid:20) (cid:18) Z (cid:19)(cid:21)
1 T σ2
e−r(T−t) e(r− 0)(u−t)+σ 0(Wu−Wt)
= E ϕ · x · ( du)
txy 2
T
0
(cid:20) (cid:18) Z (cid:19)(cid:21)
−r(T−t)
= e E [ϕ(x · H)],
txy
where H(= (1/T) T exp{(r −σ2/2)(u−t)+σ (W −W )}du) is a random variable
0 0 0 u t
for fixed t ∈ [0,T].
R
Similarly, there is
ε −r(T−t) ε
V (t,x,y) = e esssup E ϕ(Y )
txy 0,T
ε
(4.9) σ∈A
(cid:8) (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:9)
−r(T−t)
= e E [ϕ(x · G)],
txy
where G(= (1/T) T exp{(r−(σˆ )2/2)(u−t)−σˆ (W −W )}du) is a random variable
u u u t
0
for fixed t ∈ [0,T].
R
By equation (4.8) and equation (4.9), we notice that it is necessary to impose
polynomial growth conditions on ϕ to control ∂2 V and ∂2 V ε. Then we give the
xx 0 xx
estimations of ∂2 V (t,x,y) and ∂2 V ε(t,x,y) in following Lemma.
xx 0 xx

12 YUE-CAI HAN AND CHUN-YANG LIU
Lemma 4.2. Suppose that the second derivative of payoff function satisfies the poly-
nomial growth condition, i.e. there are constants K and m such that ϕ′′(x) ≤
2
K (1 + |x|m). Then, we have constant K such that
2 3
2 m
(4.10) ∂ V (t,x,y) ≤ K (1 + |x| ),
xx 0 3
(cid:12) (cid:12)
where K depends on T,(cid:12) t, E |H|2 (cid:12) , E |H|m+2 and K .
3 txy txy 2
Moreover, there is constant K such that
(cid:2)4 (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
2 ε m
(4.11) ∂ V (t,x,y) ≤ K (1 + |x| ).
xx 4
(cid:12) (cid:12)
where K depends on T,(cid:12) t, E |G|2 (cid:12), E |G|m+2 and K .
4 txy txy 2
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
Proof. As the assumption of ϕ in the lemma, we have
2 −r(T−t) ′′ 2
∂ V (t,x,y) = e E ϕ (xH)H
xx 0 txy
−r(T−t) m 2
(cid:12) (cid:12) ≤ e E (cid:2)K (1 + |xH(cid:3)| )H
txy 2
(cid:12) (cid:12)
m
≤ K (1 + |x| )(cid:2). (cid:3)
3
Here K depends on T, t, E |H|2 , E |H|m+2 and K .
3 txy txy 2
Indeed, for a constant m > 0, we have that
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
m
T−t
m m 2
EH = (1/(T)) E exp{(r − σ /2)u + σ W }du
0 0 u
−t
(cid:18)Z (cid:19)
T−t
1
)m e|r−σ 02/2|(T−t)+σ 0Wudu)m
≤ ( E(
T
−t
Z
m
1
)m em|r−σ 02/2|(T−t) eσ 0Ws
≤ ( E sup < +∞.
T
 s∈(−t,T−t) !
(cid:8) (cid:9)
On the other hand, we get the controls of ∂2 V ε similarly. Then there is a constant
xx
K which depends on T, t, E |G|2 , E |G|m+2 and K such that
4 txy txy 2
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
2 ε m
|∂ V (t,x,y)| ≤ K (1 + |x| ).
xx 4
(cid:3)
Now, by following proposition, we can get the control of I and I .
2 3
Proposition 4.3. Assume that ϕ ∈ C2(R+) and satisfies Lipschitz continuity con-
p
dition. Then there exist constants C and p such that I ,I in equation (4.5) and
1 1 2 3
equations (4.6) satisfy
p
|I | + |I | ≤ C (1 + |x| 1).
2 3 1

13
Proof. By Lemma 4.2, we have the following inequality from (3.3) and (4.11).
1
ε ε ε ε 2 2 2 ε
|∂ V + r(x∂ V − V ) + x∂ V | ≤ (σ + ε) x ∂ V
t x y 0 xx
2
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) 2 (cid:12)2 m+2
≤ (K /2)(σ + ε) |x| + |x| .
(cid:12) 4 0 (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
By the expression of V , it is true that (cid:12) (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:12)
1 (cid:12) (cid:12)
2 m+2
|∂ V + r(x∂ V − V ) + x∂ V | ≤ K σ |x| + |x| .
t 1 x 1 1 y 1 4 0
By (3.5) and (4.10), we get the controls of x2∂2 (cid:12) V , (cid:0) (cid:1)(cid:12)
xx(cid:12) 1 (cid:12)
2 2 2 2 2
x ∂ V = ∂ V + r(x∂ V − V ) + x∂ V + g¯ σ x ∂ V · (2/σ )
xx 1 t 1 x 1 1 y 1 t 0 xx 0 0
2 2 2
(4.12)(cid:12) (cid:12) ≤ (cid:12)|∂ V + r(x∂ V − V ) + x∂ V | + |σ x ∂ V (cid:12)| · (2/σ )
(cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12) t 1 x 1 1 y 1 0 xx 0 (cid:12) 0
2 m+2
≤ M(cid:0) |x| + |x| , (cid:1)
1
where M depends on K , K and σ .
1 (cid:0) 3 4 (cid:1)0
Xˆε
We can obtain the existence and uniqueness of from Theorem 5.2.1 in [16].
t
Then, by the estimates of the moments of solutions of stochastic differential equa-
tions (Corollary 12 in Section 2.5 of [15]), there is a constant N (q) for fixed q > 0
1
such that
q
ˆε N (q)(T−t) q
(4.13) E sup X ≤ N (q)e 1 (1 + |x| ).
txy s 1
"s∈[t,T] #
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
By (4.6), (4.12) and (4.13(cid:12)), w(cid:12)e have the following inequality.
T
1
2 ˆε 2 2 ˆε ˆε
|I | = E (γˆ ) (X ) ∂ V (s,X ,Y )ds
3 txy s s xx 1 s s
2
(4.14) (cid:12) (cid:20)Zt (cid:21)(cid:12)
(cid:12) T (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
ˆε 2 ˆε m+2 ′ m+2
≤ (cid:12)(M /2)E (|X | + |X | )ds ≤ M(cid:12) 1 + |x| .
1 txy s s 1
t
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Here M′ depends on T, t, N (2), N (m + 2) and M .
1 1 1 1
By (4.5), (4.10), (4.12) and (4.13), we obtain the controls of |I |.
2
T
1
2 ˆε 2 2 ˆε 2 2
|I | = E (γˆ ) (X ) ∂ V + σ (γˆ )(X ) ∂ V ds
2 txy s s xx 0 0 s s xx 1
2
(cid:12) (cid:20)Zt (cid:21)(cid:12)
(cid:12) T (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
ˆε 2 ˆε m+2
≤ (cid:12)(K /2)E (X ) + (X ) ds (cid:12)
3 txy s s
(4.15)
t
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
T
ˆε 2 ˆε m+2
+ M E (X ) + (X ) ds
1 txy s s
t
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
p
≤ M (1 + |x| 1),
2
where M depends on T, t, M , K , N (2) and N (m + 2), p ≥ m + 2.
2 1 3 1 1 1
Combine (4.14) and (4.15), there is a constant C such that
1
p
|I | + |I | ≤ C (1 + |x| 1).
2 3 1

14 YUE-CAI HAN AND CHUN-YANG LIU
(cid:3)
4.4. The continuity of the second derivative of payoff function. By Propo-
sition 4.3, we obtain the controls of I and I . Next, for fixed point (t,x,y) ∈
2 3
[0,T] × R+ × R+, it suffices to prove that
lim|I | = 0.
1
ε↓0
Notice that, if ϕ ∈ C2(R+) (i.e. its derivatives up to order 2 have polynomial
p
growth), we can get following inequality by (4.4), (4.10), (4.13) and H¨older inequal-
ity,
1/2 1/2
T T
ˆε 2 2 2 2
|I | ≤ E (σ (X ) ∂ V ) ds E (γˆ − γ¯ ) ds
1 txy 0 s xx 0 txy s s
t t
(4.16) (cid:20) (cid:20)Z (cid:21)(cid:21) (cid:20) (cid:20)Z (cid:21)(cid:21)
1/2
T
p 1/2
≤ M (1 + |x| 2) E |γˆ − γ¯ |ds .
3 txy s s
t
(cid:20) (cid:20)Z (cid:21)(cid:21)
Here, M depends on K ,T,t,σ , and p ≥ 4 + 2m. Moreover, M is independent
3 3 0 2 3
of ε.
Let hε(t,x,y) = γˆ(t,x,y;ε) − γ¯(t,x,y). By (4.2) and (4.3), we have
1, ∂2 V ε∂2 V < 0,
|hε (t,x,y)| = xx xx 0
0, ∂2 V ε∂2 V ≥ 0.
xx xx 0
(cid:26)
Thus, to prove |I | → 0 as ε → 0, it suffices to prove that
1
T
ε ˆε ˆε
(4.17) limE |h (s,X ,Y )|ds = 0.
txy s s
ε↓0
t
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
By the expression of hε, we should analyze the derivatives of V and V ε. Here,
0
we find that the continuity of ϕ′′ is necessary.
Lemma 4.4. Assume that ϕ′′ is continuous. Then ∂2 V and ∂2 V ε are continuous
xx 0 xx
with respect to (x,y).
Proof. By (4.8), we have V (t,x,y) = e−r(T−t)E [ϕ(xH)] and ∂2 V (t,x,y) =
0 txy xx 0
e−r(T−t)E [ϕ′′(xH)H2]. If ϕ′′ is continuous, then for all x ∈ R+, δ > 0, there is
txy 0
a constant ξ = ξ(δ,x ) such that
0
′′ ′′
|ϕ (xH) − ϕ (x H)| ≤ δ
0
for all xH ∈ (x H − ξ,x H + ξ).
0 0

15
So for all (x ,y ) ∈ R+ × R+, xH ∈ (x H − ξ,x H + ξ), y ∈ (y − ξ,y + ξ), we
0 0 0 0 0 0
have
2 2 −r(T−t) ′′ 2 ′′ 2
|∂ V (t,x,y) − ∂ V (t,x ,y )| = e |E [ϕ (xH)H − ϕ (x H)H ]|
xx 0 xx 0 0 0 txy 0
−r(T−t) 2 ′′ ′′
≤ e E [H |ϕ (xH) − ϕ (x H)|]
txy 0
−r(T−t) 2
≤ e δE [H ].
txy
Thus we obtain
2 2
lim ∂ V (t,x,y) = ∂ V (t,x ,y ).
xx 0 xx 0 0 0
(x,y)→(x ,y )
0 0
Similarly, we can get the continuity of ∂2 V ε. (cid:3)
xx
Remark 4.5. It is rational to think that V ε and its derivatives converge to V and
0
its corresponding derivatives as ε approaching 0 by Lemma 4.1.
Remark 4.6. To simplify the complexity brought by the variable Y , which is called
path-dependence and to study the behavior of hε, we define
λ + 2 ε 2
D = {x ∈ R | ∂ V 0∂ V ≤ 0, ∃ε > λ}.
ty xx xx 0 0
Let D0 = limDλ . Then we can get following equation when ∂2 V ε is continuous,
ty ty xx
λ↓0
0 + 2
D = {x ∈ R | ∂ V (t,x,y) = 0}.
ty xx 0
Remark 4.7. To control hε, we divide Dλ into two parts. Let α(ρ) = [−ρ,ρ], we
ty
will disscuss the characters of Dλ ∩ α(ρ) and Dλ ∩ α(ρ)c.
ty ty
Lemma 4.8. Assume that ϕ′′ is continuous. Then we have
0
P (D ∩ α(ρ)) = 0.
txy ty
Here, P (·) means the conditional probability taken with respect to Xε = x, Y ε = y.
txy t t
Proof. By (4.1) and (3.4), we can get following equation
2∂ V + r(x∂ V − V ) + 1σ2x2∂2 V = 0,
(4.18) t 0 x 0 0 2 0 xx 0
V (T) = ϕ(xH).
0
(cid:26)
Let Q = ∂2 V . Then by (4.18) we have
xx 0
2∂ Q + (r + σ2)Q + (r + 2σ2)x∂ Q + 1σ2x2∂2 Q = 0,
t 0 0 x 2 0 xx
Q(T) = ϕ′′(xH)H2.
(cid:26)
Let x = logk. Then we have that
2∂ Q + (r + σ2)Q + (r + 2σ2)∂ Q + 1 σ2∂2Q = 0,
(4.19) t 0 0 k 2 0 k
Q(T) = ϕ′′((log k)H)H2.
(cid:26)
Notice that the coefficients in equations (4.19) are constants and Q is bounded on
D0 ∩ α(ρ) by the continuity of ϕ′′ and Lemma 4.4. Moreover, by equations (4.19),
ty

16 YUE-CAI HAN AND CHUN-YANG LIU
we find that y is not related to the equations. Then by Theorem A of [17] and the
remark below it, we have that the number of zero points of Q is
no more than countable for all (s,y) ∈ [t,T] × R.
Thus, ∂2 V has no more than countable zero points.
xx 0
Hence we have P (D0 ∩ α(ρ)) = 0 by Lemma 4.10 of [11]. Then the proof of
txy ty
(cid:3)
Lemma 4.8 is completed.
On the basis of previous analysis, we will prove (4.17) now. We’re going to split
the expectation into two parts. By proving the convergence of each part, we can get
the convergence of the expectation.
Proposition 4.9. Assume that ϕ ∈ C2(R+) and ϕ′′ is continuous. Then we obtain
p
equation (4.17).
Proof. Let D¯λ is closure of Dλ , D¯0 = limD¯λ and 0 ≤ λ < ε < 1.
ty ty ty ty
λ↓0
By the definition of Dλ , we have
ty
T
ε ˆε ˆε
E |h (s,X ,Y )|ds
txy s s
t
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
T
I ˆε
≤ E (X )ds
txy D¯λ s
(4.20) (sYˆsε
t )
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
T T
I ˆε I ˆε
= E (X )ds + E (X )ds
txy D¯λ ∩α(ρ) s txy D¯λ ∩α(ρ)c s
(sYˆsε (sYˆsε
t ) t )
(cid:20)Z (cid:21) (cid:20)Z (cid:21)
= Φ + Φ .
1 2
Now, we consider the second part of (4.20) first. By (4.13) and Chebyshev’s
inequality, there is
T
I ˆε
Φ ≤ E (X )ds
2 txy α(ρ)c s
t
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
T
ˆε
≤ P sup |X | ≥ ρ ds
txy s
t  s∈[t,T] !
Z
ˆε
≤ ((T − t)/ρ)E sup |X |
txy s
"s∈[t,T] #
(T − t)N (1)
1 N (1)(T−t)
≤ e 1 (1 + |x|).
ρ
Thus, we have
(4.21) lim Φ = 0.
2
ρ→∞

17
When it comes to the first part, we note that
T
ˆε ¯λ
Φ = P X ∈ D ∩ α(ρ) ds.
1 txy s ˆε
(sY )
s
t
Z
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Let θ(Ω) = sup P (Ω), then there is
txy
λ∈[0,1]
ˆε ¯λ ¯λ
(4.22) P X ∈ D ∩ α(ρ) ≤ θ D ∩ α(ρ) .
txy s ˆε ˆε
(sY ) (sY )
s s
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
D¯λ
Notice that λ < ε. Then is a sequence of decreasing closed sets as ε ↓ 0.
sy
Xˆε
Obviously, converges weakly to X . Thus {X } is a weakly compact. By the
s s s
D¯λ D¯0
Lemma 8 of [14], it can be seen that θ ∩ α(ρ) ↓ θ ∩ α(ρ) as ε ↓ 0.
ˆε ˆε
(sY ) (sY )
s s
By Lemma 4.4, we have D¯0 = D0 .(cid:16)Hence, there i(cid:17)s (cid:16) (cid:17)
sy sy
ˆε ¯0
P X ∈ D ∩ α(ρ) = 0.
txy s ˆε
(sY )
s
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Then by definition of θ(Ω), we have
¯λ ¯0
limθ D ∩ α(ρ) = θ D ∩ α(ρ) = 0.
ˆε ˆε
(sY ) (sY )
ε↓0 s s
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
Thus, there is
ˆε ¯λ
limP X ∈ D ∩ α(ρ) = 0.
txy s ˆε
(sY )
ε↓0 s
(cid:16) (cid:17)
Then, we obtain
(4.23) limΦ = 0.
1
ε↓0
By equation (4.21) and equation (4.23), for any δ > 0, there is ρ = ρ (t,x,y,δ) >
0 0
0 such that
Φ < δ/2, for all ρ > ρ .
2 0
Next, for given ρ and δ, there is ε = ε (t,x,y,δ,ρ (t,x,y,δ)) such that
0 0 0 0
Φ < δ/2, for all ε < ε .
1 0
Therefore, for any δ > 0, there is ε = ε (t,x,y,δ) such that
0 0
Φ + Φ < δ, for all ε < ε ,
1 2 0
i.e.
T
ε ˆε ˆε
limE |h (s,X ,Y )|ds = 0.
txy s s
ε↓0
t
(cid:20)Z (cid:21)
(cid:3)

18 YUE-CAI HAN AND CHUN-YANG LIU
4.5. The proof of Main result. Now, as the analysis above, we can give the brief
proof of theorem 3.1.
The proof of main result. By inequality (4.16) and Proposition 4.9, we have
(4.24) lim|I | = 0.
1
ε↓0
By inequality (4.7), we have
V ε − (V + εV )
0 1
≤ |I | + ε(|I | + ε|I |).
1 2 3
ε
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:3)
By Proposition 4.3(cid:12)and equation (4.2(cid:12)4), we obtain the Theorem.
(cid:12) (cid:12)
Conclusion
5.
In this paper, we analyze the behavior of Asian option prices in the worst case
scenario. The model studied in this paper is an uncertain volatility model with
volatility interval [σ ,σ + ε]. As ε close to 0, the ambiguity of model vanishes.
0 0
We can also see that the worst case scenario prices of Asian option converge to its
Black-Scholes prices with constant volatility as the interval shrinks. And through
the study, we get an approach of estimating the worst case scenario Asian option
prices. At the same time, it means that we give an estimation method to solve a fully
nonlinear PDE (3.2) by imposing additional conditions on the boundary condition
and cutting it into two Black-Scholes-like equations.
References
[1] F. Black, M. Scholes, The pricing of options and corporate liabilities, Journal of Political
Economy 81 (3) (1973) 637–659.
[2] R. C. Merton, Theory of rational option pricing, Bell Journal of Ecomonics and Management
Science 4 (1) (1973) 141-183.
[3] J. Hull, A. White, The price of options on assets with stochastic volatilities, The Journal of
Finance 42 (2) (1987) 281-300.
[4] S. L. Heston, A closed-form solution for options with stochastic volatility with applications to
bond and currency options, Rev. Financial Studies 6 (2) (1993) 327-343.
[5] T. J. Lyons, Uncertain volatility and the risk free synthesis of derivatives, Appl. Math. Finance
2 (2) (1995) 117-133.
[6] M. Avellaneda, A. Levy, A. Paras, Pricing and hedging derivative securities in markets with
uncertain volatilities, Appl. Math. Finance 2 (2) (1995) 73-88.
[7] N. G. Dokuchaev, A. V. Savkin, The pricing of options in a nancial market model with trans-
action costs and uncertain volatility, J. Multinational Financial Management 8 (2-3) (1998)
353-364.
[8] P. A. Forsyth, K. R. Vetzal, Implicit solution of uncertain volatility/transaction cost option
pricing models with discretely observed barriers, Appl. Numer. Math. 36 (4) (2001) 427-445.
[9] J Vorbrink, Financial markets with volatility uncertainty, Journal of Mathematical Economics
53 (2014) 64–78.
[10] D. M. Pooley, P. A. Forsyth, K. R. Vetzal, Numerical convergence properties of option pricing
pdes with uncertain volatility, IMA J. Numer. Anal. 23 (2003) 241-267.

19
[11] J.-P. Fouque, B. Ren, Approximation for option prices under uncertain volatility, SIAM Journal
on Financial Mathematics 5 (2014) 360-383.
[12] R. Cont, Model uncertainty and its impact on the pricing of derivative instruments, Math.
Finance 16 (2006) 519-547.
[13] J. Yong, X. Zhou, Stochastic Controls, Hamiltonian Systems and HJB Equations, New York:
Springer, 1999.
[14] L. Denis, M. Hu, S. Peng, Function spaces and capacity related to a sublinear expectation:
Application to g-brownian motion paths, Potential Anal. 34 (2011) 139-161.
[15] N. Krylov, Controlled Diusion Processes, New York: Springer, Berlin, 1980.
[16] B.Øksendal. Stochastic Differential Equations. New York: Springer, Berlin, 2003.
[17] The zero set of a solution of a parabolic equation, J.Reine Angew. Math. 390 (1988) 79-96.