 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deliverable D-JRP1-5.6
 
Workpackage 5
 
 
 
    
Responsible Partner: NVI 
Contributing partners:  
   

                         
   
 
GENERAL INFORMATION 
 
European  Joint  Programme  full  Promoting One Health in Europe through joint actions on foodborne zoonoses, 
title  antimicrobial resistance and emerging microbiological hazards  
European  Joint  Programme  One Health EJP 
acronym 
Funding  This project has received funding from the European  Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830.  
Grant Agreement  Grant agreement n° 773830 
Start Date  01/01/2018 
Duration  60 Months 
 
DOCUMENT MANAGEMENT 
 
JIP/JRP deliverable  JRP1-5.6 OHEJP IMPART FINAL MEETING NOTES 
Project Acronym  IMPART 
Author  Jannice Schau Slettemeås 
Other contributors  Agnès  Perrin-Guyomard,  Marisa  Haenni,  Manal AbuOun,  Sven  Maurischat, 
Alexandra  Irrgang,  Mirjam  Grobbel,  Jette  S.  Kjeldgaard,  Antonio  Battisti, 
Alessia Franco, Marianne Sunde, Matthew Ellington, Magdalena Zajac, Nina 
Kozieł, Arkadiusz Dors, Dariusz Wasyl, Magdalena Skarżyńska, Cindy Dierikx, 
Stefan Börjesson, Märit Pringle, Els Broens, Kees Veldman 
Due  month  of  the  24 
report 
Actual  submission  49 
month 
Type   D 
R: Document, report 
Save date: 19-12-2022 
DEC:  Websites,  patent 
filings,  videos,  etc.; 
OTHER 
Dissemination level  CO 
PU: Public (default) 
This is the default setting. If this project deliverable should be confidential, please 
CO:  confidential,  only 
add  justification  here  (may  be  assessed  by  PMT): 
for  members  of  the 
 ...................................................................................................................................... 
consortium  (including 
the  Commission   ......................................................................................................................................  
Services) 

| European Joint Programme full   | Promoting One Health in Europe through joint actions on foodborne zoonoses,   |
| title                           | antimicrobial resistance and emerging microbiological hazards                 |
|:--------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| European Joint Programme        | One Health EJP                                                                |
| acronym                         |                                                                               |
| Funding                         | This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020      |
|                                 | research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830.            |
| Grant Agreement                 | Grant agreement n° 773830                                                     |
| Start Date                      | 01/01/2018                                                                    |
| Duration                        | 60 Months                                                                     |

| JIP/JRP deliverable    | JRP1-5.6 OHEJP IMPART FINAL MEETING NOTES                                                                                              |
|:-----------------------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Project Acronym        | IMPART                                                                                                                                 |
| Author                 | Jannice Schau Slettemeås                                                                                                               |
| Other contributors     | Agnès Perrin-Guyomard, Marisa Haenni, Manal AbuOun, Sven Maurischat,                                                                   |
|                        | Alexandra Irrgang, Mirjam Grobbel, Jette S. Kjeldgaard, Antonio Battisti,                                                              |
|                        | Alessia Franco, Marianne Sunde, Matthew Ellington, Magdalena Zajac, Nina                                                               |
|                        | Kozieł, Arkadiusz Dors, Dariusz Wasyl, Magdalena Skarżyńska, Cindy Dierikx,                                                            |
|                        | Stefan Börjesson, Märit Pringle, Els Broens, Kees Veldman                                                                              |
| Due month of the       | 24                                                                                                                                     |
| report                 |                                                                                                                                        |
| Actual submission      | 49                                                                                                                                     |
| month                  |                                                                                                                                        |
| Type                   | D                                                                                                                                      |
| R: Document, report    | Save date: 19-12-2022                                                                                                                  |
| DEC: Websites, patent  |                                                                                                                                        |
| filings, videos, etc.; |                                                                                                                                        |
| OTHER                  |                                                                                                                                        |
| Dissemination level    | CO                                                                                                                                     |
| PU: Public (default)   | This is the default setting. If this project deliverable should be confidential, please                                                |
| CO: confidential, only | add justification here (may be assessed by PMT):                                                                                       |
| for members of the     | ...................................................................................................................................... |
| consortium (including  | ...................................................................................................................................... |
| the Commission         |                                                                                                                                        |
| Services)              |                                                                                                                                        |

                         
   
Dissemination  OHEJP WP 1 ☐  OHEJP WP 2 ☐  OHEJP WP 3 ☐ 
Author’s suggestion to  OHEJP WP 4 ☐  OHEJP WP 5 ☐  OHEJP WP 6 ☐ 
inform  the  following  OHEJP WP 7 ☐  Project Management Team ☐ 
possible  interested 
Communication Team ☐  Scientific Steering Board ☐ 
parties. 
National Stakeholders/Program Owners Committee ☐ 
EFSA ☐  ECDC ☐ 
Other  international 
stakeholder(s): ……………………………………………………………………… 
Social Media:  .............................................................................................................  
Other recipient(s):  ...................................................................................................  

| 0                      | 1                                                                                                                           |
|:-----------------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Dissemination          | OHEJP WP 1 ☐ OHEJP WP 2 ☐ OHEJP WP 3 ☐                                                                                      |
| Author’s suggestion to | OHEJP WP 4 ☐ OHEJP WP 5 ☐ OHEJP WP 6 ☐                                                                                      |
| inform the following   | OHEJP WP 7 ☐ Project Management Team ☐                                                                                      |
| possible interested    | Communication Team ☐ Scientific Steering Board ☐                                                                            |
| parties.               | National Stakeholders/Program Owners Committee ☐                                                                            |
|                        | EFSA ☐ ECDC ☐                                                                                                               |
|                        | Other international                                                                                                         |
|                        | stakeholder(s): ………………………………………………………………………                                                                                 |
|                        | Social Media: ............................................................................................................. |
|                        | Other recipient(s): ...................................................................................................     |

                         
 
OHEJP IMPART FINAL MEETING, NOTES 
 
Purpose of the meeting:  
Present the outcomes of the OHEJP IMPART project. All slides from the meeting will be made 
available to the participants. 
 
1.1. Introduction of the program (Kees) 
Agenda presented, 4 hour meeting from 12-16. 
 
1.2. Round the table (all) 
Short presentation of the 22 participants in this meeting covering their role at their own institute 
and within the project. 
 
1.3. Introduction of the project (Kees) 
IMPART: IMproving Phenotypic Antimicrobial Resistance Testing. In total thirteen partners 
from nine countries. The total funding was 1.6 M€ over the years 2018-2020 (including 1 year 
extension, 2 x 6 months budget neutral extension). The project covered in total five work 
packages (WP): 
WP1:  culturing  of  colistin  resistant  Enterobacteriaceae  (Sophie  Granier/  Agnès  Perrin-
Guyomard) 
WP2: culturing of carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae (Jannice Schau Slettemeås) 
WP3: establishing new epidemiological cut-off values (ECOFFs) (Kees Veldman)  
WP4: optimising a disks diffusion method for Clostridium difficile (Sven Maurischat) 
WP5: dissemination of knowledge (Sophie Granier) 
 
Links to deliverables within the project: 
https://onehealthejp.eu/groups/impart/ 
https://zenodo.org/search?page=2&size=20&q=IMPART# 
 
1.4. WP1 presentation + discussion (Agnès) 
Objectives of WP1 – selective isolation and detection of colistin-resistant Enterobacteriaceae.  
Evaluate and standardize methodologies to: i) selectively isolate acquired colistin-resistant in 
relevant Gram negative bacteria, ii) Phenotypically characterize colistin resistance, and iii) 
Confirm  the  presence  of transferable  colistin  resistance  mechanisms. WP1  presented the 
performed in the pre- and final ring trial.  
For pre-ring trial: several culture conditions were tested among four labs (Anses Fougères, 
NVI, RIVM and WBVR). Meat and caeca samples from pig and turkey were spiked with 102 
CFU/g colistin resistant bacteria, enriched in BPW with and without colistin and cultured in the 
following plates: MacConkey with 2 mg/L colistin, CHROMID® Colistin R, SuperPolymyxin and 
CHROMagar™ COL-APSE.  
Outcome:  good  to  excellent  sensitivity  for  MacConkey  w  2mg/L  colistin  and  CHROMID® 
Colistin  R.  No  significant  difference  in  performance  between  selective  or  non-selective 
enrichment. No evident influence of matrices. Too many false positive (presumptive positive 
colonies verified negative). Non-chromogenic agar not suitable for mixed flora. 
4 
 

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
For final ring trial: focus on positive samples, not negative (exclude negative by PCR of DNA 
extracted  from  enrichment  broth),  include  a  resuscitation  step,  decrease  matrix  effect  by 
diluting samples before selective enrichment overnight, and include chromogenic agars to 
better discriminate the mixed flora. Eleven labs (Anses Lyon, APHA, BfR, DTU, IZSLT, NVI, 
PIWET, RIVM, SSI, SVA and WBVR). Same matrices, and plates: CHROMID® Colistin R, 
SuperPolymyxin and CHROMagar™ COL-APSE. Prize of agar plates important!  
Planning for a publication in Letters in Applied Microbiology (open access), draft planned, 
submit in April.  
1.4.1. Q&A:  
Marisa (Anses) – why was the final ring trial results from one lab discarded?  
This lab put the samples in the freezer and the results were discarded because the 
answers were different compared to the other  labs. The frozen step they included 
limited  the  growth  of  the  spiked  strain  in  samples.  Same  experience  with  spiked 
samples for the regional labs in first PT trials of the French NRL. Some spiked strains 
cannot be grown after frozen step in sample.  
Cindy (RIVM) – colonies of switched samples. General comment from all labs. Relative low 
number to spike samples.  
Stefan (SVA) – same experience as Cindy and in WP1 ring trial – lower detection rate after 
freezing samples. They have tested both fresh and frozen samples from the same animal, got 
one or two log reduction. 
Dariusz (PULAWY) – should the results have been excluded from the 11th laboratory?  
They were excluded from the evaluation of the performance of the selective agar plating 
in the final ring trial. It is an outcome of WP1 and the results will be mentioned in the 
paper/article.  
 
1.5. WP2 presentation + discussion (Jannice) 
Objectives of WP2 – selective isolation and detection of colistin-resistant Enterobacteriaceae. 
Present  a  harmonized  method  for  selective  isolation  and  detection  of  carbapenemase 
producing  Enterobacteriaceae  (CPE),  i)  selectively  isolate  carbapenemase-producing 
Enterobacteriaceae,  ii)  phenotypically  characterize  carbapenemase  production,  and  iii) 
confirm the presence of transferable carbapenem resistance mechanisms. 
For pre-ring trial: Performed in November 2018. Several culture conditions were tested among 
four labs (Anses Fougères, NVI, RIVM and WBVR). Meat and caeca samples from pig and 
turkey were spiked with 102 CFU/g carbapenem resistant bacteria, enriched in BPW overnight 
at 37°C and cultured on several in-house and ready-to-use plates in parallel to test two different 
incubation temperatures, 35-37°C and 44°C. Also tested PCR on DNA extracted from the 
overnight BPW enrichment. General outcome: do not recommend to use 44°C to incubate agar 
plates, no significant difference between in-house and ready-to-use agar plates.  
For final ring trial: Performed in September 2019. Enrichment in BPW overnight at 37°C, 
include a voluntary PCR step to detect CP determinants from the overnight BPW enrichment, 
include  only  ready-to-use  agar  to  minimize  the  possible  differences  preparing  in-house; 
CHROMID®  OXA-48,  Chromatic™  OXA-48,  Brilliance™  CRE  Agar,  CHROMagar™ 
mSuperCARBA™, Chromatic™ CRE, and CHROMID® CARBA. Eleven labs (Anses Lyon, 
APHA, BfR, DTU, IZSLT, NVI, PIWET, RIVM, SSI, SVA and WBVR). Same matrices as the 
pre-ring trial, but included a strain with low meropenem MIC (E. coli R1180 VIM-1) known to 
be problematic to detect using the EURL-AR protocol for detection of CP E. coli.  
02.03.2021  OHEJP IMPART Final Meeting, Wageningen Bioveterinary Research, Teams  Page 5  

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
Outcome in general: All agar plates 100% specificity. When all samples were included, the 
sensitivity  was  best  for  CHROMID®  OXA-48  (100%)  and  Chromatic™  CRE  (76%).  Two 
samples were excluded due to low meropenem MIC (0.25) in one and the strain in the other 
sample was either contaminated or a conjugation had taken place (was spiked with Salmonella 
Kentucky NDM-1, several labs reported detection of E. coli and/or Enterobacter spp. carrying 
NDM).  When  excluding  these;  the  following  plates  performed  with  100%  sensitivity; 
CHROMID®  OXA-48,  Chromatic™  CRE,  and  CHROMID®  CARBA.  The  CHROMagar™ 
mSuperCARBA™ had 96%. The Brilliance™ CRE agar performed with 75% sensitivity. With 
this plate there was an issue during the validation: the E. coli 16874 OXA-48 and E. coli TZ 
3638 GES-5 strain did not grow on this plate from ten and nine labs, respectively, that used 
these two strains for validation (strains distributed by the EURL-AR to validate the selective 
agar plates used in the European surveillance of CP E. coli from caecal and meat samples). 
Conclusion to WP2: i) all agars except Chromatic™ OXA-48 performed well, ii) Brilliance™ 
CRE Agar did not detect the control strains (unreliable results in spiked samples?), iii) direct 
PCR worked well for meat samples, but should be improved for caecal samples, and iv) E. coli 
bla  in one of the spiked samples was not detected using the BPW enrichment and CPE 
VIM-1
selective  agars  included,  but  it  was  detected  from  an  in-house  MacConkey  agar  with 
cefotaxime and meropenem→ should this agar have been added to the ring trial? 
We were not able to fully validate different enrichment methods due to the limitation to a low 
number of samples which made it difficult to conclude on the best method. 
1.5.1. Q&A 
Jette (DTU, EURL-AR) comment to GES-5 strain which was an issue in the validation of the 
plates. It has been problems with this strain earlier. The EURL-AR are think of replacing it. 
 
1.6. WP3 presentation + discussion (Kees) 
Setting  epidemiological cut-off  values (ECOFFs). Objective:  generate  data to  allow  to  set 
ECOFFs for animal pathogens. Nine partners (Anses, APHA, BfR, IZSLT, NVI, PULAWY, SVA, 
UU,  and  WBVR).  Priority  list  of  species  to  test  agreed  on  the  kick  off  meeting.  Three 
antimicrobial panels (GN, GP and macrolide plate) covering 10-12 different antimicrobials. 
Nineteen different pathogens were included. Decided to use the CLSI method to test more or 
less according to ISO standards. Pasteurella multocida was a problem regarding test medium; 
should not have CAMHB with lysed horse blood (LHB). Most of the P. multocida did not grow 
in  regular  CAMHB  -  ended  up  to  test  all  in  CAMHB  +  LHB  (same  for  streptococci).  For 
Enterobacteriaceae, Staphylococci and Mannheimia haemolytica, only CAMHB was used as 
test medium, no feedback of difficulty to grow for the latter. Actinobacillus pleuropneumoniae; 
everyone used VFM according to CLSI.  
Approximately 3000 strains were tested with up to 26 antimicrobials. A total of 51696 MIC 
values were produced and 1352 MIC distributions. Need at least five distributions to set an 
ECOFF – missed some distributions for some bacteria.  
There was some delay in plate delivery from Sensititre. MIC values were uploaded to the 
EUCAST web site at the end of summer 2020. In September 2020, there was a meeting with 
EUCAST and VETCAST to discuss the results of IMPART.  
New tentative ECOFFs were presented for S. pseudintermedius and S. hyicus. 
 
There  was  an  issue  with  the  acceptance  of  MIC  distributions  by  EUCAST  regarding  the 
methods used (test medium) for some of the bacterial species. The criteria for accepting the 
02.03.2021  OHEJP IMPART Final Meeting, Wageningen Bioveterinary Research, Teams  Page 6  

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
MIC data have become more stringent over the past years. Have to use EUCAST developed 
methods. Streptococci should be tested in Mueller Hinton Fastidious broth (MH-F broth, in-
house  EUCAST  media)  and  not  CAMHB  +  LHB.  Bridging  studies  for  P.  multocida  and 
streptococci have been performed on small scale during December 2020 to prove that the MIC 
valued produced are equal using both methods. Some media effects were observed when 
testing P. multocida, but with streptococci there was a high correlation between MIC results.  
Proposed but not decided was to repeat the trial with the same P. multocida and streptococci 
isolates in 3 laboratory (EUCAST, University of Bern and WBVR) to evaluate the outcomes of 
the pilot. More bridging studies are planned within VetCAST (M. haemolytica and APP).  
1.6.1. Q&A:  
Antonio (IZSLT): descriptive analysis between the broths – any statistical test applied? Skewed 
towards a certain MIC? Not only descriptive - comparison is interesting.  
EUCAST strict on method – complicated discussion, veterinary diagnostics labs use 
CLSI guidelines not EUCAST. Goal to have IMPART streptococci MIC values accepted 
at least after the bridging studies. All MIC values have been uploaded to the EUCAST 
database.  
Marisa  (Anses):  What  about  zone  diameters?  EUCAST  happy  with  zone  diameters,  but 
VetCAST has not started with working on diameters yet. This is something to consider. 
 
1.7. WP4 presentation + discussion (Sven) 
The objective of WP4 is to: Develop and standardize a disk diffusion method for susceptibility 
testing of Clostridioides (Clostridium) difficile. A strain collection of C. difficile strains from the 
participants  was  created,  a  disk  diffusion method  was  developed  and  used  in  a ring trial 
performed in the summer 2020. Inhibition zone diameters (IZD) were produced.  
Antimicrobial resistance in C. difficile occur, but at low rates for therapeutic antimicrobials. 
Some antimicrobials have high resistance rates, but it differs between countries. Antimicrobial 
resistance in C. difficile can lead to global spread of special virulent C. difficile lineages with 
resistance to for instance quinolones. The antimicrobials of interest are also those used in 
treatment.  
Established a disk diffusion method based on CLSI and EUCAST guidelines for anaerobes 
(only  agar  dilution)  and  published  methods  for  anaerobes,  but  this  covered  only  a  few 
antimicrobials. Tested different conditions; inoculum densities (McFarland), solid media, liquid 
media and anaerobic conditions. Anaerobic conditions played the most important role. Used i) 
anaerobic work bench (fully anaerobic + pre-reduction of media), ii) semi-anaerobic conditions 
(pre-reduction of media), and iii) aerobic conditions (no pre-reduction). i) and ii) gave similar 
results. Tested repeatability of the antimicrobial with few C. diff strains – four repeats.  
Performed ring trial in June 2020 with seven participants, who tested the sensitivity of eight C. 
diff strains by disk diffusion to eight antimicrobials. Performance was good between the labs. 
Metronidazole was the most difficult antimicrobial to test for. No vancomycin nor imipenem 
resistant strains included. High reproducibility between labs. 
Anaerobic  jars  vs  chamber  –  gave  different  results.  Jars  gave  bigger  IZD  compared  to 
chambers.  Total  value  different,  but  also  Standard  Deviation  was  higher  in  labs  using 
anaerobic jars.  
 
Used strain collection to produce IZD distributions. Could propose cut offs for six of the eight 
antimicrobials included. Low amount of non-wild type strains for some antimicrobials.  
02.03.2021  OHEJP IMPART Final Meeting, Wageningen Bioveterinary Research, Teams  Page 7  

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
Summary: identified anaerobic conditions as the factor with highest impact. Could determine 
cut off values for resistant phenotypes. The optimized protocol ensures: reliable determination 
of  non-wild  type  vs  wild  type  –  suitable  for  most  antimicrobials,  high  repeatability  and 
reproducibility. Low cost method.  
1.7.1. Q&A:  
Kees (WBVR): Do not need resistant (non-wild type) isolates to produce ECOFFs.   
The IZD distribution could not distinguish between the non-wild type and wild type.  
Cindy (RIVM): Commented on the resistance mechanisms, if the resistance mechanism to 
imipenem is known in C. diff? 
No known publication on the mechanism of imipenem in C. diff.  
 
1.8. Gap analysis and self-evaluation (Kees, all) 
OHEJP Committee asked us to perform a gap analysis covering: i) What were the goals, ii) 
what was achieved, iii) what were the gaps, and iv) how to fill the gaps.  
WP1 and WP2 – did not achieve the initial goal, but got to test different media next to one 
another.  
WP3 – no accepted ECOFFs yet, but some proposed ECOFFs are ready.  
WP4 – miss imipenem and vancomycin cut offs, limited number of vancomycin resistant strains 
in the C. diff strain collection.  
WP5 – no extranet or videos 
 
How to fill the gaps: 
WP1 – more trials (many strains with MIC around the breakpoint) 
WP2 – consider selective pre-enrichment, commercial media for detection Salmonella 
WP3 – ECOFFs published, continue work on this in VetCAST supported by COST action 
ENOVAT. More ECOFFs will follow! 
WP4 – include more vancomycin and metronidazole resistant strains 
WP5 – finish publications in WP1, WP2 and WP4. WP3 – publish ECOFFs. 
No perfect method yet for WP1 and WP2.  
1.8.1. Q&A 
1.8.1.1. WP2 –  
Jette (DTU, EURL-AR) - consider to add step to the EURL-AR protocol. Will perform a survey 
of what people do, what they use the BPW enrichment for. Complicated step.  
Stefan (SVA) – consider enrichment broth for CPE and ESBLs – conjugation might occur in 
the enrichment step. Have to evaluate the conjugation in the enrichment broth. 
Alex (BfR) – Natalie Pauly did a lot of work on improving the isolation method. Best plates were 
MacConkey  with  meropenem  and  cefotaxime.  Included  enrichment  step;  incubation  in 
microaerophilic conditions could reduce background flora. This also improved realtime PCR 
results. Helps with second enrichment in microaerophilic conditions overnight. To be published! 
1.8.1.2. WP3 –  
EUCAST advice VetCAST to come up with more ECOFFs. “After” IMPART the activities will 
be ongoing.  
 
02.03.2021  OHEJP IMPART Final Meeting, Wageningen Bioveterinary Research, Teams  Page 8  

This meeting is part of the European Joint Programme One Health EJP. 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under Grant Agreement No 773830. 
 
1.8.1.3. WP4 –  
Concentration in the disks. Clindamycin IZD of susceptible strains were close to the resistant 
strains, diameters low for susceptible strains. Difficult to discriminate between susceptible and 
resistant strains. Imipenem – not possible to determine resistance by disk diffusion – might be 
it does not work for this antimicrobial. No standardized method by EUCAST. Disk diffusion 
works for 6 of the 8 antimicrobials!! For a new antimicrobial – test if the disk diffusion method 
is working. Regarding imipenem as choice for carbapenem; imipenem chosen for scientific 
reasons not because it is the treatment option. Could be an epidemiological driver. Could 
consider choosing another carbapenem like meropenem.  
 
1.9. Things to finish/ publication plans (WPL’s) 
Writing of publications and establishing ECOFFs, and other administrative parts of the IMPART 
project. Still a bit of work in 2021 after the project has ended.  
   
1.10. Possibilities for follow-up of the project? (all) 
WP1  –  do  not  know  if  they  will  continue  working  on  the  colistin  method.  Is  it  a  goal  for 
surveillance, or not? Not a mandatory part of the AMR monitoring at the moment. Publish work 
and see if anyone interested. 
WP2 – follow up the EURL-AR survey.  
WP3 – the work is continued within VetCAST supported by COST action ENOVAT 
WP4 – followed up in OHEJP FED-AMR – application of the disk diffusion protocol. Could be 
a side project to test the disk diffusion and strain collection for other antimicrobials. More 
interesting is probably to establish microdilution methods – does not exist at the moment – 
there are some publications. Could consider to contact EUCAST lab in Växsjö to see if they 
are interested to look at development of a microdilution method. Etest are mostly used by labs 
– but are quite expensive and commercial.  
Cindy (RIVM) - there is an ESCMID group working on C. difficile – could see or contact this 
working / study group.  
Dariusz (PULAWY) – consider showing results at the OHEJP ASM conference in Copenhagen 
in June 2021? Present gap analysis, what to fulfil, might be a good idea to present some output 
from IMPART. Abstract deadline in 15 March.  
Cindy (RIVM) – future things – small projects can use MedVetNet and apply for money/funding, 
like  for  student  projects  working  on  colistin  resistance  or  ECOFFs.  They  have  a  call  for 
workshops at the moments.  
 
1.11. Summary and closure of the meeting (Kees) 
Thank you for attending and input.  
 
02.03.2021  OHEJP IMPART Final Meeting, Wageningen Bioveterinary Research, Teams  Page 9  