A Review of Biotic Interactions and Taxon Names Found 
in globalbioticinteractions/varassin2023 
by Nomer and Elton, two naive review bots 
review@globalbioticinteractions.org 
https://globalbioticinteractions.org/contribute 
https://github.com/globalbioticinteractions/varassin2023/issues 
2024-02-10 
Abstract 
Life on Earth is sustained by complex interactions between organisms and their environment. These 
biotic interactions can be captured in datasets and published digitally. We describe a review process 
of such an openly accessible digital interactions dataset of known origin, and discuss their outcome. 
The dataset under review (aka globalbioticinteractions/varassin2023) has size 10.2MiB and contains 
2729 interactions with 1 unique types of associations (e.g., flowersVisitedBy) between 83 primary 
taxa (e.g., Aechmea distichantha) and 18 associated taxa (e.g., Phaethornis eurynome). The report 
includes detailed summaries of interactions data as well as a taxonomic review from multiple 
perspectives. 
Table of Contents 
Introduction .............................................................................................................................................. 2 
Data Review ..................................................................................................................................... 2 
Methods ...................................................................................................................................................... 2 
Results ......................................................................................................................................................... 3 
Biotic Interactions ......................................................................................................................... 3 
Interaction Networks ......................................................................................................... 7 
Taxonomic Alignment.................................................................................................................. 8 
Additional Reviews .................................................................................................................... 11 
GloBI Review Badge .................................................................................................................. 12 
GloBI Index Badge ...................................................................................................................... 12 
Discussion ............................................................................................................................................... 13 
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................................. 13 

References .............................................................................................................................................. 13 
 
Introduction 
Data Review 
Data review can be a time consuming process, especially when done manually. This 
review report aims to help facilitate data review of species interaction claims made 
in datasets registered with Global Biotic Interactions (Poelen, Simons, and Mungall 
2014). The review includes summary statistics of, and observations about, the 
dataset under review: 
The Ecology of Plant Hummingbird Interactions (EPHI) - Brazil. 
file:///home/runner/work/varassin2023/varassin2023/./ 
For additional metadata related to this dataset, please visit 
https://github.com/globalbioticinteractions/varassin2023 and inspect associated 
metadata files including, but not limited to, README.md, eml.xml, and/or globi.json. 
Methods 
The review is performed through programmatic scripts that leverage tools like 
Preston, Elton, Nomer combined with third-party tools like grep, mlr, tail and head. 
Tools used in this review process 
tool name  version 
elton  0.13.2 
nomer  0.5.6 
mlr  6.0.0 
pandoc  3.1.6.1 
The review process can be described in the form of the script below 1. 
# get versioned copy of the dataset (size approx. 10.2MiB) under review
  
 
1 Note that you have to first get the data (e.g., via elton pull 
globalbioticinteractions/varassin2023) before being able to generate reviews (e.g., 
elton review globalbioticinteractions/varassin2023), extract interaction claims (e.g., 
elton interactions globalbioticinteractions/varassin2023), or list taxonomic names 
(e.g., elton names globalbioticinteractions/varassin2023) 

elton pull globalbioticinteractions/varassin2023 
 
# generate review notes 
elton review globalbioticinteractions/varassin2023\ 
 > review.tsv 
 
# export indexed interaction records 
elton interactions globalbioticinteractions/varassin2023\ 
 > interactions.tsv 
 
# export names and align them with the Catalogue of Life using Nomer  
elton names globalbioticinteractions/varassin2023\ 
 | nomer append col\ 
 > name-alignment.tsv 
or visually, in a process diagram. 
                                                     
                                                               
                                                                
 
Review Process Overview 
You can find a recent copy of the full review script at check-data.sh. 
Results 
In the following sections, the results of the review are summarized 2. Then, links to 
the detailed review reports are provided. 
Biotic Interactions 
             
                                    
                         
                              
 
Biotic Interaction Data Model 
 
2 Disclaimer: The results in this review should be considered friendly, yet naive, 
notes from an unsophisticated robot. Please keep that in mind when considering the 
review results. 

In this review, biotic interactions (or biotic associations) are modeled as a primary 
(aka subject, source) organism interacting with an associate (aka object, target) 
organism. The dataset under review classified the primary/associate organisms 
with specific taxa. The primary and associate organisms The kind of interaction is 
documented as an interaction type. 
The dataset under review (aka globalbioticinteractions/varassin2023) has size 
10.2MiB and contains 2729 interactions with 1 unique types of associations (e.g., 
flowersVisitedBy) between 83 primary taxa (e.g., Aechmea distichantha) and 18 
associated taxa (e.g., Phaethornis eurynome). 
An exhaustive list of indexed interaction claims can be found in csv and tsv archives. 
To facilitate discovery, the first 500 claims available on the html page at indexed-
interactions.html are shown below. 
The exhaustive list was used to create the following data summaries below. 
Sample of Indexed Interaction Claims 
interactionTypeNa
sourceTaxonName  me  targetTaxonName  referenceCitation 
Canistrum  flowersVisitedBy  Amazilia  interactions.tsv 
ambiguum 
Canistrum  flowersVisitedBy  Amazilia  interactions.tsv 
ambiguum 
Canistrum  flowersVisitedBy  Amazilia  interactions.tsv 
ambiguum 
Canistrum  flowersVisitedBy  Amazilia  interactions.tsv 
ambiguum 
 
Most Frequently Mentioned Interaction Types (up to 20 most frequent) 
interactionTypeName  count 
flowersVisitedBy  22248 
 
Most Frequently Mentioned Primary Taxa (up to 20 most frequent) 
sourceTaxonName  count 
Aechmea distichantha  7071 
Canistrum ambiguum  1562 
Nidularium rutilans  1515 
Siphocampylus longipedunculatus  1019 
Nidularium innocentii  939 
Aechmea cylindrata  817 

sourceTaxonName  count 
Nidularium marigoi  717 
Aechmea pectinata  707 
Nidularium angustibracteatum  641 
Fuchsia regia  567 
Heliconia farinosa  451 
Salvia ombrophila  422 
Sinningia cooperi  369 
Besleria longimucronata  331 
Nematanthus fissus  286 
Psychotria nuda  266 
Billbergia pyramidalis  264 
Dahlstedtia pinnata  249 
Schlumbergera opuntioides  237 
 
Most Frequently Mentioned Associate Taxa (up to 20 most frequent) 
targetTaxonName  count 
Phaethornis eurynome  9278 
Stephanoxis lalandi  4418 
Ramphodon naevius  3125 
Thalurania glaucopis  2548 
Clytolaema rubricauda  1031 
Phaethornis ruber  799 
Chionomesa fimbriata  471 
Amazilia  232 
Leucochloris albicollis  137 
Chrysuronia versicolor  115 
Trochilidae  38 
Phaethornis squalidus  33 
Chlorostilbon lucidus  7 
Lophornis magnificus  6 
Florisuga fusca  4 
Phaethornis  3 
Chlorestes cyanus  2 
Eupetomena cirrochloris  1 
 

Most Frequent Interactions between Primary and Associate Taxa (up to 20 most 
frequent) 
interactionTypeNa
sourceTaxonName  me  targetTaxonName  count 
Aechmea  flowersVisitedBy  Stephanoxis  3980 
distichantha  lalandi 
Aechmea  flowersVisitedBy  Phaethornis  1826 
distichantha  eurynome 
Nidularium  flowersVisitedBy  Phaethornis  1436 
rutilans  eurynome 
Siphocampylus  flowersVisitedBy  Phaethornis  1004 
longipedunculatus  eurynome 
Canistrum  flowersVisitedBy  Thalurania  841 
ambiguum  glaucopis 
Nidularium  flowersVisitedBy  Phaethornis  689 
marigoi  eurynome 
Nidularium  flowersVisitedBy  Phaethornis  637 
innocentii  eurynome 
Aechmea  flowersVisitedBy  Ramphodon  592 
distichantha  naevius 
Nidularium  flowersVisitedBy  Phaethornis  453 
angustibracteatum  eurynome 
Canistrum  flowersVisitedBy  Phaethornis  432 
ambiguum  eurynome 
Heliconia farinosa  flowersVisitedBy  Ramphodon  398 
naevius 
Aechmea  flowersVisitedBy  Thalurania  374 
cylindrata  glaucopis 
Aechmea  flowersVisitedBy  Thalurania  363 
distichantha  glaucopis 
Sinningia cooperi  flowersVisitedBy  Phaethornis  362 
eurynome 
Salvia ombrophila  flowersVisitedBy  Phaethornis  359 
eurynome 
Fuchsia regia  flowersVisitedBy  Clytolaema  331 
rubricauda 
Nidularium  flowersVisitedBy  Ramphodon  287 
innocentii  naevius 
Aechmea pectinata  flowersVisitedBy  Chionomesa  273 
fimbriata 

interactionTypeNa
sourceTaxonName  me  targetTaxonName  count 
Billbergia  flowersVisitedBy  Ramphodon  264 
pyramidalis  naevius 
Interaction Networks 
The figures below provide a graph view on the dataset under review. The first 
shows a summary network on the kingdom level, and the second shows how 
interactions on the family level. Note that both network graphs were first aligned 
taxonomically via the Catalogue of Life. Please refer to the original (or verbatim) 
taxonomic names for a more original view on the interaction data. 
               
 
Interactions on taxonomic kingdom rank as interpreted by the Catalogue of Life 
download svg 

          
             
            
            
         
                  
             
                     
            
           
          
                      
         
         
             
          
           
          
         
             
 
Interactions on the taxonomic family rank as interpreted by the Catalogue of Life. 
download svg 
You can download the indexed dataset under review at indexed-interactions.csv. A 
tab-separated file can be found at indexed-interactions.tsv 
Learn more about the structure of this download at GloBI website, by opening a 
GitHub issue, or by sending an email. 
Another way to discover the dataset under review is by searching for it on the GloBI 
website. 
Taxonomic Alignment 
As part of the review, all names are aligned against various name catalogs (e.g., col, 
ncbi, discoverlife, gbif, itis, globi, mdd, tpt, and pbdb). These alignments may serve 

as a way to review name usage or aid in selecting of a suitable taxonomic name 
resource to use. 
Sample of Name Alignments 
resolvedCatalogNa
providedName  relationName  me  resolvedName 
Adenocalymma  HAS_ACCEPTED_N col  Adenocalymma 
ternatum  AME  ternatum 
Aechmea  HAS_ACCEPTED_N col  Aechmea 
bocainensis  AME  bocainensis 
Aechmea  HAS_ACCEPTED_N col  Aechmea 
cylindrata  AME  cylindrata 
Aechmea  HAS_ACCEPTED_N col  Aechmea 
distichantha  AME  distichantha 
 
Distribution of Taxonomic Ranks of Aligned Names by Catalog. Names that were not 
aligned with a catalog are counted as NAs. So, the total number of unaligned names 
for a catalog will be listed in their NA row. 
resolvedCatalogName  resolvedRank  count 
tpt  NA  87 
tpt  species  11 
tpt  genus  2 
tpt  family  1 
pbdb  NA  99 
pbdb  genus  1 
pbdb  family  1 
ncbi  species  74 
ncbi  NA  23 
ncbi  genus  2 
ncbi  varietas  1 
ncbi  family  1 
mdd  NA  101 
itis  NA  67 
itis  species  31 
itis  genus  2 
itis  family  1 
globi  species  71 
globi  genus  32 

resolvedCatalogName  resolvedRank  count 
globi  NA  31 
globi  variety  2 
globi  family  1 
gbif  species  98 
gbif  genus  2 
gbif  variety  1 
gbif  subspecies  1 
gbif  family  1 
discoverlife  NA  101 
col  species  98 
col  genus  2 
col  variety  1 
col  subspecies  1 
col  family  1 
 
Name relationship types per catalog. Name relationship type “NONE” means that a 
name was not recognized by the associated catalog. “SAME_AS” indicates either a 
“HAS_ACCEPTED_NAME” or “SYNONYM_OF” name relationship type. We recognize 
that “SYNONYM_OF” encompasses many types of nomenclatural synonymies (ICZN 
1999) (e.g., junior synonym, senior synonyms). 
resolvedCatalogName  relationName  count 
col  HAS_ACCEPTED_NAME  96 
col  SYNONYM_OF  11 
discoverlife  NONE  101 
gbif  HAS_ACCEPTED_NAME  110 
gbif  SYNONYM_OF  8 
globi  NONE  26 
globi  SAME_AS  516 
itis  NONE  67 
itis  HAS_ACCEPTED_NAME  34 
mdd  NONE  101 
ncbi  NONE  23 
ncbi  SAME_AS  75 
ncbi  SYNONYM_OF  4 
pbdb  NONE  99 

resolvedCatalogName  relationName  count 
pbdb  HAS_ACCEPTED_NAME  2 
tpt  NONE  87 
tpt  HAS_ACCEPTED_NAME  14 
 
List of Available Name Alignment Reports 
catalog name  alignment results 
col  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
ncbi  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
discoverlife  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
gbif  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
itis  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
globi  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
mdd  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
tpt  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
pbdb  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
Additional Reviews 
Elton, Nomer, and other tools may have difficulties interpreting existing species 
interaction datasets. Or, they may misbehave, or otherwise show unexpected 
behavior. As part of the review process, detailed review notes are kept that 
document possibly misbehaving, or confused, review bots. An sample of review 
notes associated with this review can be found below. 
First few lines in the review notes. 
reviewDate  reviewCommentType  reviewComment 
2024-02-10T19:26:16Z  summary  file:///home/runner/wor
k/varassin2023/varassin
2023/./ 
2024-02-10T19:26:16Z  summary  22248 interaction(s) 

reviewDate  reviewCommentType  reviewComment 
2024-02-10T19:26:16Z  summary  0 note(s) 
2024-02-10T19:26:16Z  summary  22248 info(s) 
In addtion, you can find the most frequently occurring notes in the table below. 
: Most frequently occurring review notes, if any. 
For addition information on review notes, please have a look at the first 500 Review 
Notes or the download full csv or tsv archives. 
GloBI Review Badge 
As part of the review, a review badge is generated. This review badge can be 
included in webpages to indicate the review status of the dataset under review. 
 
Sample of a GloBI Review Badge 3 
Note that if the badge is green, no review notes were generated. If the badge is 
yellow, the review bots may need some help with interpreting the species 
interaction data. 
GloBI Index Badge 
If the dataset under review has been registered with GloBI, and has been succesfully 
indexed by GloBI, the GloBI Index Status Badge will turn green. This means that the 
dataset under review was indexed by GloBI and is available through GloBI services 
and derived data products. 
 
Sample of a GloBI Index Badge 4 
If you’d like to keep track of reviews or index status of the dataset under review, 
please visit GloBI’s dataset index 5 for badge examples. 
 
3 Up-to-date status of the GloBI Review Badge can be retrieved from the GloBI 
Review Depot 
4 Up-to-date status of the GloBI Index Badge can be retrieved from GloBI’s API 
5 At time of writing (2024-02-10) the version of the GloBI dataset index was 
available at 
[https://globalbioticinteractions.org/datasets](https://globalbioticinteractions.org
/datasets) 

Discussion 
This review is intended to provide a perspective on the dataset to aid understanding 
of species interaction claims discovered. However, this review should not be 
considered as fitness of use or other kind of quality assessment. Instead, the review 
may be used as in indication of the open-ness6 and FAIRness (Wilkinson et al. 2016; 
Trekels et al. 2023) of the dataset: in order to perform this review, the data was 
likely openly available, Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable. Currently, 
this Open-FAIR assessment is qualitative, and with measurement units specified, a 
more quantitative approach can be implemented. 
This report also showcases the reuse of machine-actionable (meta)data, something 
highly recommended by the FAIR Data Principles (Wilkinson et al. 2016). Making 
(meta)data machine-actionable means that it can be more precisely processed by 
computers, enabling even naive review bots like Nomer and Elton to interpret the 
data effectively. This capability is crucial for not just automating the generation of 
reports, but also to facilitate seamless data exchanges, i.e., interoperability. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank the many humans that created us and those who created and maintained 
the data, software and other intellectual resources that were used for producing this 
review. In addition, we are grateful for the natural resources providing the basis for 
these human and bot activities. 
References 
ICZN. 1999. “International Code of Zoological Nomenclature.” The International 
Trust for Zoological Nomenclature, London, UK. https://www.iczn.org/the-
code/the-code-online/. 
Poelen, Jorrit H., James D. Simons, and Chris J. Mungall. 2014. “Global Biotic 
Interactions: An Open Infrastructure to Share and Analyze Species-Interaction 
Datasets.” Ecological Informatics 24 (November): 148–59. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoinf.2014.08.005. 
Trekels, Maarten, Debora Pignatari Drucker, José Augusto Salim, Jeff Ollerton, Jorrit 
Poelen, Filipi Miranda Soares, Max Rünzel, Muo Kasina, Quentin Groom, and 
Mariano Devoto. 2023. “WorldFAIR Project (D10.1) Agriculture-related pollinator 
 
6 According to http://opendefinition.org/: “Open data is data that can be freely used, 
re-used and redistributed by anyone - subject only, at most, to the requirement to 
attribute and sharealike.” 

data standards use cases report.” Zenodo. 
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8176978. 
Wilkinson, Mark D., Michel Dumontier, IJsbrand Jan Aalbersberg, Gabrielle Appleton, 
Myles Axton, Arie Baak, Niklas Blomberg, et al. 2016. “The FAIR Guiding Principles 
for Scientific Data Management and Stewardship.” Scientific Data 3 (1). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18. 