Skulls ‑ not quite Heads
pre‑built coreboot images with an easy installation process
Skulls makes it easy to install an unlocked, up‑to‑date and easy to use coreboot‑based BIOS on your
laptop.
• unlocked: software update after first‑time flashing / no restrictions for connected hardware
• easy to use: SeaBIOS ‑ simply a boot menu, compatible with Windows and Linux
• up to date: Frequently a new image with the latest versions of all components
Supported Laptops
• Lenovo Thinkpad X230
• Lenovo Thinkpad X230T
• Lenovo Thinkpad T430
• Lenovo Thinkpad T530
1

• Lenovo Thinkpad W530
• Lenovo Thinkpad T440p
When do we do a release?
Either when * There is a new SeaBIOS release, * There is a new Intel microcode release (for our CPU
model), * There is new coreboot development that affects us, or * We change the config
How we build
• Everything necessary to build coreboot is included here
• When doing a release, we always try to upload to coreboot’s board status project
• If we add out‑of‑tree patches, we always post them for review upstream
• The scripts to build reproducibly are based on these scripts that use the coreboot‑sdk.
Alternatives
Weaimtobetheeasiestpossiblecorebootdistribution‑bothtoinstallandtouse. Andsinceourflash
image is unlocked to enable software updates, it’s easy to move to alternative systems from it:
• Heads ‑ a coreboot distribution with pre‑built (or reproducibly buildable) flash images (for the
X230 and others). Heads includes Linux, with tools to create a trusted boot chain using your
GPG key and the TPM.
• libreboot‑acorebootdistributionwithpre‑builtimagereleases. Supportsalotofdevicesthese
days, including most of what Skulls supports.
Sponsors
• Mayan EDMS
become a sponsor and you can be listed here. any compensation is very much appreciated.
2