Can justice be fair when it is blind? How social network structures can promote or
prevent the evolution of despotism
1 1 2 1
Cedric Perret , Simon T. Powers , Jeremy Pitt and Emma Hart
1Edinburgh Napier University, Edinburgh, EH10 5DT
2Imperial College London, London, SW7 2BT
8102 nuJ 82  ]EP.oib-q[  1v66011.6081:viXra c.perret@napier.ac.uk,s.powers@napier.ac.uk, e.hart@napier.ac.uk, j.pitt@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract To cope with the complexity inherent of large scale coor-
dination, human societies tend to facilitate collective deci-
Hierarchyisanefficientwayforagrouptoorganize,butoften
sion making by switching to hierarchy with a minority of
goes along with inequality that benefits leaders. To control
influential individuals i.e. leaders, and a majority of in-
despotic behaviour, followers can assess leaders’ decisions
fluenceable individuals i.e. followers (Hooper et al., 2010;
by aggregating their own and their neighbours’ experience,
and in response challenge despotic leaders. But in hierarchi- Powers and Lehmann, 2014; Perret et al., 2017). Similarly,
calsocialnetworks, thisinteractionaljusticecanbelimitedby hierarchy has been shown to be highly relevant to artifi-
(i) the high influence of a small clique who are treated better,
cial social systems by reducing the cost of organization
and (ii) the low connectedness of followers. Here we study
(Pugliese et al., 2015; Chih-Han et al., 2010). However, hi-
how the connectedness of a social network affects the co-
erarchy also implies an important cost. In human societies,
evolution of despotism in leaders and tolerance to despotism
in followers. We simulate the evolution of a population of leaders tend to evolve despotic behaviourwhere they exploit
agents, where the influence of anagent is itsnumber of social followers in order to increase their own resources (Mitchell,
links. Whether a leader remains in power is controlled by the
1915; Carneiro, 1970; Hayden and Villeneuve, 2010). This
overall satisfaction of group members, as determined by their
“iron law of oligarchy” ultimately leads to an overall reduc-
joint assessment of the leaders behaviour. We demonstrate
tion in the productivity of the group (e.g less production of
that centralization of a social network around a highly influ-
ential clique greatly increases the level of despotism. This is resources through collective action) (Summers, 2005). Evi-
because the clique is more satisfied, and their higher influ- dently, such behaviour should be avoided in an artificial so-
ence spreads their positive opinion of the leader throughout
cial system. Yet, the mechanisms behind the evolution of
the network. Finally, our results suggest that increasing the
such despotism and inequality are still not fully understood.
connectedness of followers limits despotism while maintain-
ing hierarchy.
Commonexplanationsemphasizetheimportanceofa sur-
plus of transmissible resources (Mattison et al., 2016), the
Introduction
capacity of followers to avoid domination, or the ability of
The efficiency and stability of self-organized open systems leaders to impose domination (Johnstone, 2000; Summers,
are strongly dependent on the agents’ capacity to sustain co- 2005). However, and as described by the famous quote of
ordination and cooperation. For instance, to build a new John Acton: “Power tends to corrupt, and absolute power
structure, a group of robots need to decide of their respec- corrupts absolutely”, it has also been suggestedthat the sole
tive roles such as harvester to get resources, manufacturer asymmetrical distribution of power is enough to lead to in-
to create the required parts and builder to assemble them. equality and despotism. (Mitchell, 1915). Power can be de-
Power suppliers and consumers within a smart grid have fined as the influence of individuals on collective decisions.
to adjust the scheduling of production and consumption to Leaders might exert this influence to leverage institutional
efficiently reduce power waste. Humans collectively de- rules, and ultimately tilt the distribution of cost and benefits
cide of rules to manage common resources and limit self- toward their own advantage. But even if leaders have a huge
ish behaviours. Whether it is in artificial or natural so- influence on collective decisions in hierarchical societies
cial systems, autonomous agents need to constantly take (Gavrilets et al., 2016), their behaviours are constrained in-
collective decisions to coordinate complex tasks. Further- directly by the satisfaction of the rest of the group. For in-
more, collective decisions can also encompass the creation stance, an intolerable selfish leader could be, for the follow-
and modification of crucial institutional rules that affect ers, worth the cost of overthrowing him. However, follow-
group welfare e.g. rules governing the distribution of re- ers often lack direct knowledge of the leader’s behaviours
sources; as in human societies (Ostrom, 1990; North, 1990) and decisions. To enforce such control, they judge decision-
or electronic self organized institutions (Pitt et al., 2012). makers by the state of the laws and rules they manage. In re-

sponse to too despotic rules, they can then start a revolution nectedness of followers. By doing so, interactional justice
to overthrowthe leader. This form of justice, where individ- becomes effective at constraining the leader, allowing the
uals judge how institutions and decision-makers treat them, benefits of hierarchy to be realized without the costs. Our
is defined as interactional justice (Schermerhorn, 2012), and results contribute to the knowledge on the evolution of hier-
is a common way in which individuals exert control over archy, institutions and justice, key concepts to understand
their institutions in natural social systems. Yet, the moni- natural social systems and design artificial self-organized
toring of institutions and a fortiori leaders is greatly depen- system.
dent on the individuals having knowledge of the state of the
system. This is because the agents first need to make a self- Model definition
assessmentofhowtheyarebeingtreated,i.e. buildtheirown
To investigate the impact of social network structure on the
opinion from their personal experiences; and then make a
evolution of despotism, we have developed a model to sim-
collective assessment about whether to try to induce change,
ulate the evolution of distribution preferences within a hi-
i.e. aggregate the opinions of other agents. Although this
erarchical society. This section provides an outline of the
kind of opinion formation based on individual and social
model with a detailed description of the mechanisms imple-
learning produces a global assessment of the current state
mented: the network structure, the distribution of resources,
of institutions, it is also constrained by the knowledge ac-
the interactional justice and the reproduction.
cessible to individuals. Because of the size and complexity
of large human groups, this knowledge is often incomplete.
Model outline and life cycle
Indeed, leaders have a strong influence on followers’ opin-
ion. In addition, leaders are often surrounded by a clique – We consider a fixed-size population of N individuals ex-
a limited number of highly influential individuals, such as a plicitly organized in a directed network. The population is
patriarchal clan in early agricultural societies (Kaplan et al., composed of one leader deciding of the distribution of re-
−
2009) or key policy-makers in contemporaneous communi- sources and N 1 followers. In addition, the population
ties (Miller, 1958). By providing them with preferential ac- is divided between N highly influential individuals called
c
cess toresources,leaders cancause theclique tohavea posi- clique members which includes the leader, and N individ-
o
tive opinion, which they then spread throughoutthe network uals with low influence called outgroup members . The life
as a result of their high connectedness. The opinion of fol- cycle consists of:
lowers thus becomes biased by the clique, blinding them to
1. The group produces an amount of resource that is dis-
the actual level of inequality. This blindness limits the con-
tributed amongst group members according to the distri-
trol of followers on the leader’s decision. In recent work,
bution preference of the leader, z (Equation 2).
Pitt (2017) modelled this process and has formally demon- L
strated that a centralized social network with a leader and a
2. Each individual builds its own subjective mindset about
clique biases the transfer of knowledge,and ultimately leads
the fairness of resource allocation, m, as a function of the
to misconceptions on the current fairness level of the soci-
resources it personally received and its own distribution
ety. From this, it was predicted that an incomplete transfer
preference (Equation 3).
of knowledgecould blind the interactional justice of follow-
ers and allow the evolution of despotic leaders. However,
3. Each individual builds its opinion about the overall fair-
this prediction has remained untested so far.
nessof theresourcedistribution,o, byaggregatingits own
Here we address this by using an evolutionary model to
mindset and the mindsets of the neighbouringindividuals
answer the following question: how does social network
(individuals linked to the focal individual) (Equation 4).
structures affect the evolution of despotism in hierarchical
societies ? In the model, agents are explicitly organized in 4. Each individual compares its opinion to its distribution
a centralized network with the leader as the central node.
preference z. If the opinion is higher than the preference,
Agents are described by their preferenceson the distribution
the individual is considered defiant and pays a cost to at-
of resources, and their opinions on the actual level of fair-
tempt a revolution.
ness in the society. We use a Moran process (Moran, 1958;
Lieberman et al.,2005)tosimulatetheevolutionoftheirdis- 5. In case of a large proportion of defiant individuals within
tribution preferences and study how the network structure the population, i.e. above a revolution threshold T, a new
affects the level of despotism. Our results highlight a neg- leader and clique are chosen within the defiant individu-
ative effect of centralization on the evolution of distribution als. The network is then rebuilt.
preferences, with more centralised networks leading to fol-
lowers accepting higher levels of despotism as interactional 6. A random individual dies and is replaced by another indi-
justice becomes biased. But on the flip side, we show that vidual with a probability proportionalto its fitness (Equa-
the level of despotism can be limited by increasing the con- tion 5). This reproductive process is repeated R times.

Individuals are modelled by one cultural trait; their dis- The function defining the distribution f(s (t)) is modulated
i
tribution preference z defined between equal (z = 0) and by the leader preference z such that :
L
strongly skewed (z = 1). In leaders, this trait z is trans-
L
e−s i(t)∗z L(t)
lated into the function defining the distribution of resources
f(s (t)) = (2)
i
with z = 0 representinga fair leader and z = 1 a despotic PN − es j(t)∗z L(t)
L L
j=1
leader. In followers, this trait is translated into their toler-
ance towards inequality, with the minimum z = 0 equal to The distribution of resources is normalized and is bounded
no tolerance and the maximum z = 1 equal to the max- between an equal distribution of resources (with z = 0)
imum tolerance where any level of despotism is accepted. and a strongly asymmetrical distribution of resources (with
The agents are also indirectlydescribedby their influenceα, z = 1 ). We make the assumption that the leader has full
heretranslatedintothe probabilitythat thefocalnodeis con- controloncollectivedecision. This is a commonassumption
nectedtowardanotherindividual. Thetraitz evolvesfollow- in the literature on the evolution of despotism (Buston et al.,
ing a Moran process described in the reproduction section 2007).
(Moran, 1958; Lieberman et al., 2005). In addition, when a
Interactional justice
new individual is born, its z trait can mutate at a rate µ .
z
When a mutation occurs, a random value is sampled from a Each individual i has an opinion o (t) describing its view of
i
truncatedGaussiandistributioncenteredonthecurrentvalue the current fairness of the society. It is the result of its own
of the trait, with variance σ . mindsetm (t), whichiscalculatedfromits ownpersonalex-
z i
perience, and the mindset of its incoming social neighbours.
Network structures
First, an individual’s mindset is calculated by comparingthe
To study how hierarchy can affect the evolution of despo- resources it received with an egalitarian distribution:
tism, we explicitly describe the social structure of the pop-
−
ulation by a directed social network. In this network, each 1/N p(t)
m (t) = (3)
node represents an individual and each directed link repre- i 1/N − p
min
sents a social contact from one individual to another. We
The mindset is normalized by the difference between the
define the in-degree and the out-degree of an individual as
maximumshare1/N andthe minimumpossibleshare p .
the number of links connected respectively toward and from min
As a result, the mindset is not dependant of the absolute
this focal node. The influence of an individual is taken to be
amount of resources produced B. The opinion o (t) of indi-
its connectedness α defined as the probability of an individ- i
vidual i is then calculated as:
ual to be connected toward another individual. To build the
network, we use an algorithmderivedfrom the Erdo˝s–Re´nyi
k
m (t)L + P m (t)
model (Erdo˝s and Renyi, 1959) as follows: o (t) = i j=1 j , (4)
i
k (t) + L
i
1. The leader and all members of the clique are fully con-
nected. with j an incoming neighbour, k (t) the in-degree of the fo-
i
calnode,andLaweightdeterminingtherelativeimportance
2. For each individual, a directed link is created from the
of its own experience compared to the mindset of neigh-
individual i to the individual j following a probability α
c
bours.
if the focal individual i is member of the clique or is the
The variables m and o are bounded between 0 (totally satis-
leader, and α if the focal individual i is a follower.
o
fied) and 1 (totally dissatisfied). An individual is considered
If a node is not connected to any individual at the end of
defiant if its opinion value is more than its tolerance thresh-
the algorithm, one link is added from that node towards a
old z (t). A defiant individual then pays a cost to attempt a
i
randomly chosen individual. The network structure is then
revolutionC. Incase ofalargeproportionofdefiantindivid-
described by the value of α and α . We consider a network
c o uals within the population, i.e. above a revolution threshold
as randomwhenα = α , andas centralizedwhenα > α .
c o c o T, the current leader and clique become outgroup members
and a new leader and clique are chosen from the defiant in-
dividuals. The network is then rebuilt.
Distribution of resources
At each round, the group produces a fixed amount of re- Reproduction
sourcesB = 2N. Theresourcesare distributedas a function
We consider here the evolutionary process as only cultural
of the social position s of the individual, with the social po-
i evolution (Boyd and Richerson, 1985). The evolution of the
sition of the leader, clique and followers being respectively
population is modelled by a Moran Process (Moran, 1958;
0, 1 and 2. The fitness w (t) of an individual i at a time t is
i Lieberman et al., 2005). This has been shown to be an ef-
equivalent to the resources received:
ficient method to study evolution in finite populations and
∗
w (t) = B f(s (t)) (1) keeps the size of the population constant. The reproduction
i i

follows a death-birthprocess. At each time step, a randomly A
chosen individual dies. Then, the vacant node is replaced 0.100  Z*
0.075
by the offspring of an individual chosen within the popula- o*z*z 0.6
0.050
0.5
tion with a probability proportionalto its fitness, i.e. fitness- a
0.025
0.4
proportionate selection. The individual chosen to die is also
0.1 0.2 a 0.3 0.4 0.5
competing to fill the vacant node with one of its own off- c
spring. More formally, the new individual has a probability
P(i) to be the offspring of individual i according to : B 1.00 a C 1.00 a
o c
0.75 0.75
w i(t) 0.075 0.4
P(i)(t) = , (5) 0.50 0.50 0.3
N 0.050
P w (t) 0.2
j=1 j 0.25 0.025 0.25
0.1
0.00 0.00
with N the population size, and j = 0 the individual pre-
0.1 0.2a 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.025 0.0a50 0.075 0.100
viously occupying the node. We assume that a vacant node c o
can be replaced by any other individualin the populationi.e.
∗
the individual changing its distribution preference can learn Figure 1: Mean value of the evolutionary stable point z in
from the observation of any other individual. Because we function of the connectedness of the clique α and connect-
c
consider the opinion formation to happen on a longer time edness of the outgroup α
o
scale than the evolution of cultural items, this process is re-
peated R times by generation.
and its trait z no longer affects the distribution of resources.
Results
When the tolerance of followers is fixed, the distribution of
In this section we report our experimental results. To pro- resources is the only selection pressure existing on z. Con-
vide a comprehensiveinvestigationof our researchquestion, sequently, the level of despotism z will evolve towards the
L
we perform two analyses. In our first analysis, we consider stable point z∗ defined as the maximumvalue of z for which
that only the leader expresses its distribution preference z a revolution will not occur. The value of this evolutionary
L
and that followers’ distribution preferencez is fixed. Then, stablepointis afunctionofthenetworkstructure,i.e. α and
f c
we combine mathematical analysis and numerical simula- α ,foragivenfollowers’toleranceandrevolutionthreshold.
o
tions to study the effect of the network structure e.g. α and Because it is not possibleto analyticallycalculate z∗ , we use
c
α on the evolution of despotism. In our second analysis, numerical simulations to determinate its value as a function
o
we relax this assumption and use numerical simulations to of α and α . The default parameters used in the simula-
c o
allow both leader and follower preferences to evolve. We tions, unless otherwise specified, are N = 500, N = 25,
c
define the level of despotism as the level of inequality im- L = 1, T = 0.1, z = 0.25, R = 100. For each set of pa-
f
posed by the leader which is here its distribution preference rametersconsidered,100independentsimulationshavebeen
z . realized. The results presented, unless otherwise specified,
L
are the mean value of replicates.
Analysis 1: Evolution of despotism level with fixed
Figure 1.A demonstrates that centralization of the net-
followers’ tolerance
∗
work structure leads to a higher level of despotism z . The
We consider first that only the leader expresses z and that ∗
greatest level of despotism z = 0.71 is obtained for the
followers’ distribution preference z is fixed. The fitness of
f maximum α and minimum α ; and the lowest level of
c o
the leader w L(t) is equal to: z∗
despotism = 0.35 is obtained for the minimum α and
c
maximum α . To better understand the contribution of each
1 o
w L(t) = . (6) variable, a statistical model has been built. To take in ac-
PN − es i∗z L(t)
i=1 count the heteroskedacity inherent to the model, we built a
mixed linear regression model with α as a random effect.
It can be shown that: o
It shows that α , α and their interaction have a significant
c o
PN e−s i∗z z∗
dw (t) s L effect on the level of despotism at equilibrium (p-value
L = i=1 i > 0 (7)
1.10−6).
dz (PN e−s i∗z L)2 < Because the presence of significant interaction
L
i=1
limits the interpretation of the statistical model, a graphi-
In other words, an increase in the level of despotism z al- cal representation is presented in figure 1.B and figure 1.C.
L
ways increases the fitness of the leader and should be posi- They show that α has a linear positive effect on the level
c
∗
tively selected. However,it can exist a value z of the leader of despotism while α has a exponential linear effect on the
o
trait z between 0 and 1 for which the group undergoes level of despotism. In addition, it also depicts a strong in-
L
a revolution. In this case, the leader becomes a follower teraction between the two variables with the positive effect

|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |

| B 1.00 a               | C 1.00 a                   |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |
| o                      | c                          |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |
| 0.75                   | 0.75                       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |
| 0.50 0.075 *z          | 0.4                        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |
| 0.050                  | 0.50 *z                    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |
| 0.25 0.025             | 0.3                        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |
| 0.00                   | 0.25 0.2                   |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |
| 0.1 0.2a 0.3 0.4 0.5   | 0.1                        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |
| c                      | 0.00                       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |
|                        | 0.025 0.0a50 0.075 0.100   |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |
|                        | o                          |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |     |
|:-----------------------|:---------------------------|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:----|
|                        |                            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | a   |
|                        |                            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | c   |
|                        |                            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 0.4 |
|                        |                            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 0.3 |
|                        |                            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 0.2 |
|                        |                            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | 0.1 |

|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |

of α on despotism being strongly dependent of the value of
c ***
α . In other words, a more centralized system lead to higher *** ***
o
despotism only when followers are also disconnected from 1.00
z fo eulav naeMemit revo egarevA
each other. Therefore, it suggests that increasing connect-
0.75
edness of outgroup members is a efficient way to limit the
evolution of despotism.
0.50
Analysis 2: Evolution of despotism level and
0.25
follower’s tolerance
0.00
In our second analysis, we allow the tolerance of follow-
0.0 0.1 0.2 a 0.3 0.4 0.5
ers to evolve. Because of the complexity of the model, we c
use numerical simulations to analyse the model. The results
of interest are the mean value of the distribution preference Figure 2: Long-run time averages over 5 X 107 generations
z and the level of despotism defined as the leader’s value
of the mean level of fairness z as a function of clique con-
of distribution preference z . In addition, we present the
L nectedness α . Grey circles represent the mean value of dis-
c
mean value of mindset m obtained from self-assessment,
tribution preference of the leader z . Results are compared
L
the mean value of opinion o obtained from interaction with 1X10−6)
by pairwise Welch’s t-test (***: p-value <
neighbours, the mean value of bias defined as the difference
between m and o and the frequency of revolution events
1.00
within the population. Because of the presence of a muta-
tion operator, the system is an ergodic Markov Chain with
0.75
no absorbing states. Therefore, the result of interest is the
stationary distribution, which describes how long the sys- 0.50
tem spends in each state. To calculate this, we present the
0.25
averageoverlong-runtime over5X107 generationsby sam-
pling 50 data points every 1X106 time steps. This methodis 0.00
0.0 0.1 0.2 a 0.3 0.4 0.5
confirmed as a good approximation of the stationary distri-
c
bution by the absence of a periodic pattern of cycles and the
Mean value of mindset
standard error between simulations being always less than
Mean value of opinion
0.027 . The default parameters used in the simulations, un- Percentage of revolution event
less otherwise specified, are N = 500, N = 25, L = 1,
c
T = 0.1, R = 100, C = 0.1, σ = 0.01 and µ = 0.01. Figure 3: Long-run time averages over 5 X 107 generations
m
The initial values of z are randomly generated. For each set of the mean mindset, mean opinion z and mean percentage
of parameters considered, 50 independent simulations have of revolution as a function of clique connectedness α . Or-
c
been realized. The box plots represents the dispersion of ange bars represent the mean value of bias defined as the
the mean value across time. The results presented as scatter difference between mindset and opinion.
plots show the mean value of replicates and the error bars
representthe standarderrorbetweenthemeanvalueof repli-
cates. Figure 2 demonstrates a similar positive effect of the con-
Figure2 confirmsthat increasingthe connectednessofthe nectedness of the leader and its clique on the mean value of
leader and its clique significantly leads to a higher level of distribution preferencez. In other words, centralization lead
despotism z , even when the distribution preference of fol- followers to be more tolerant to despotism. By deciding of a
L
lowers also evolves. Figure 2 shows that above 0.1, further more skewed distribution of resources, the leader increases
increasing the connectedness of the clique does not have a its fitness which causes its distribution preference to spread
significant effect. However, this plateau is explained by the in the population. This effect associated with the cost of
maximum limit imposed on the distribution preference z. revolutionleads to the mean value of distribution preference
As before, this result is explained by the evolution of leader being close to the leader distribution preference. It is also
distribution preference being controlled by the threshold at worth noting that even in a random network and in absence
which followers start a revolution and change the leader of bias, followers evolve a relative tolerance to despotism.
and its clique. Figure 3 highlights the mechanism behind In addition, in contrast to the previous result, the model in-
the centralization effect: an increase in clique connected- cludingthe evolution of followers’ preferencehas an overall
ness α is translated into a higher negative bias of opin- higher level of despotism. This result is explained by the
c
ions which leads to a lower frequency of revolution, and follower preference for equality being limited by the cost of
ultimately a higher mean level of despotism. In addition, revolutionandthenecessityofhavinga thresholdproportion

| ***                         |    |     |    | None   |     | None   |     | None   |    | None   |    | None   |    | None   |    | None   |    |    | None   |    | None   |
| *** ***                     |    |     |    |        |     |        |     |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |        |
| 1.00                        |    |     |    |        |     |        |     |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |        |
| z                           |    |     |    |        |     |        |     |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |        |
| fo                          |    |     |    |        |     |        |     |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |        |
| 0.75 eulav                  |    |     |    |        |     |        |     |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |        |
| 0.50 naeM                   |    |     |    |        |     |        |     |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |        |
| 0.25                        |    |     |    |        |     |        |     |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |        |
| 0.00                        |    |     |    |        |     |        |     |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |        |
| 0.0 0.1 0.2 a 0.3 0.4 0.5   |    |     |    |        |     |        |     |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |        |
| c                           |    |     |    |        |     |        |     |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |        |
|:----------------------------|:---|:----|:---|:-------|:----|:-------|:----|:-------|:---|:-------|:---|:-------|:---|:-------|:---|:-------|:---|:---|:-------|:---|:-------|
|                             |    |     |    |        | *** |        |     |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |        |
|                             |    | *** |    |        |     |        | *** |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |        |    |    |        |    |        |

| 1.00                             |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| emit                             |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| 0.75                             |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| revo                             |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| 0.50                             |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| egarevA                          |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| 0.25                             |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| 0.00                             |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| 0.0 0.1 0.2 a 0.3 0.4 0.5        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| c                                |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| Mean value of mindset            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| Mean value of opinion            |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| Percentage of revolution event   |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|:---------------------------------|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|

| 0   | 1                              |
|:----|:-------------------------------|
|     | Mean value of mindset          |
|     | Mean value of opinion          |
|     | Percentage of revolution event |

the results where the tolerance of followers is fixed. How-
1.00
ever, Figure 5 confirms that increasing the connectedness of
followersgreatlyreducesthebiasandthereforeincreasesthe
z fo eulav naeMemit revo egarevA 0.75
frequencyofrevolutioninresponsetodespoticbehaviour. In
other words, the influence of the leader and its clique which
0.50
blind followers judgement is dependent of disconnected fol-
lowers. Therefore, the smaller effect of α on the level of
o
0.25
despotism in this analysis is due to the other constraints af-
fecting the cost and benefit of revolution as stated in the re-
0.00 sults looking at the effect of α . It suggest that the revolu-
c
0.00 0.05 0.1a0 0.15 0.20
tion mechanism also affects the evolution of despotism and
o
should be investigated in future work.
Figure 4: Long-run time averages over 5 X 107 generations
Discussion
of the mean level of fairness z as a function of outgroup
Summary
connectedness α . Grey circles represents the mean value
o
of distribution preference of the leader z . Despite the potential benefits of the hierarchy,centralization
L
appears to go along with despotism, i.e. inequality enforced
by leaders. Yet, it is still hard to determine if inequality and
1.00
despotism are an inherent consequence of centralization or
0.75 the result of a common element. Although different factors
have been identified, the role of distribution of influence and
0.50
its impact on knowledge transfer has not yet been investi-
gated. To fill this gap, we have simulated such a scenario
0.25
by modelling the evolution of distribution preference in ar-
0.00 tificial societies structured in different social networks. The
0.00 0.05 0.1a0 0.15 0.20
model developed demonstrates that the centralization of so-
o
cial networks leads to the evolution of higher despotism and
Mean value of mindset
inequality. In other words, an asymmetrical distribution of
Mean value of opinion
Percentage of revolution event influence is sufficient to create inequality. This result holds
when the tolerance of followers is fixed or in a more real-
Figure 5: Long-run time averages over 5 X 107 generations istic set-up where tolerance of followers evolve. This result
of the mean mindset, mean opinion z and mean percentage is explained by the knowledge of followers on the leader’s
of revolution as a function of outgroup connectedness α . decision which is (i) biased by the influential members of
o
Orange bars represent the mean value of bias defined as the the clique, and (ii) limited by their low connectedness to
difference between mindset and opinion. other followers. As a consequence, followers can’t impar-
tially enforce their control on leaders and a fortiori on col-
lectively decided institutional rules. Furthermore, the model
of individuals being in a defiant state at the same time. Fi- demonstrates that the effect of influential members on fol-
nally, a close-up look at the simulations show that z strongly lowers’ opinion is strongly dependent on followers having
varybecauseofsuccessionofperiodofincreasingdespotism low connectedness. Indeed,a slight increase in the influence
and period of revolution. Indeed, the followerpreferencefor of followers greatly reduces the despotism created by the
equality is dependent of the leader preference and leads to clique influence. However, as shown by comparing the first
chaotic variations. Despite this, the upper limit value of z and second analysis, this effect is weaker when follower’s
and its average on long-run time confirms the positive effect distribution preference is also evolving. Overall, this result
of centralization on the level of despotism. suggests that increasing the connection between followers
Figure 4 shows that increasing the connectedness of fol- could be a solution to limit despotism in social systems.
lowers leads to a lower level of despotism z , even when
L
Related work
the distribution preference of followers also evolves. In ad-
dition, it demonstrates a similar effect on the mean value Theresults presentedhereattempt to bridgethe gapbetween
of distribution preference z for the reason stated previously. two main research axes. Previous research work has ei-
Both of these effects have been tested using a linear regres- ther examined the impact of centralization on opinion for-
1.10−6).
sion and are statistically significant (p-value < It mation processes, but without evolutionary processes, or
is worth noting that the effect of the connectedness of fol- has studied the evolution of despotism without integrating
lowers on the level of despotism is smaller in comparison to mechanisms underlying opinion formation. On the former

| 1.00                        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    | None   |    |    |
| 0.75 z                      |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |        |    |    |
| fo                          |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |        |    |    |
| eulav                       |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |        |    |    |
| 0.50                        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |        |    |    |
| naeM                        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |        |    |    |
| 0.25                        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |        |    |    |
| 0.00                        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |        |    |    |
| 0.00 0.05 0.1a0 0.15 0.20   |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |        |    |    |
| o                           |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |        |    |    |
|:----------------------------|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:-------|:---|:---|

| 1.00                             |    | None   |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| emit                             |    |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| 0.75                             |    |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| revo                             |    |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| 0.50                             |    |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| egarevA                          |    |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| 0.25                             |    |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| 0.00                             |    |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| 0.00 0.05 0.1a0 0.15 0.20        |    |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| o                                |    |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| Mean value of mindset            |    |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| Mean value of opinion            |    |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
| Percentage of revolution event   |    |        |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|:---------------------------------|:---|:-------|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|

| 0   | 1                             |
|:----|:------------------------------|
|     | Mean value of mindset         |
|     | Mean value of opinion         |
|     | Percentage of revolution even |

side, Gavrilets et al. (2016) have shown that the presence of the total amountwhile in the dictator game the share kept by
highly influential individuals can strongly bias the collec- theproposergoesupto72%(Oosterbeek et al.,2004; Engel,
tive decision. Later on, Pitt (2017) has integrated institu- 2010). In conclusion, the ability of followers to punish the
tional rules and interactional justice into a multi-agent sys- leader reduces its tendency toward despotism. Importantly,
tems and shown that hierarchy can bias the followers’ opin- ourresults show that centralizationof the social networkcan
ion on leader decided rules. We have here confirmed that blind the judgement of followers and transform the distribu-
this result still holds even when the evolution of individual tionofresourcesfromanultimatumgametoadictatorgame.
preferences for the distribution of resources are taken in ac-
Assumptions and further work
count. Furthermore,we have shown that integratingthe evo-
lution of followers’ preferencescan lead to irregular level of
We made a number of assumptions to keep our model
despotism but yet, with the same qualitative behaviours as
tractable. First of all, the model developed considers only
when only the leader’s distribution preference evolves. On
blind evolutionary processes as a driver of change in dis-
the other hand, reproductive skew theory used mathemati-
tribution preferences. However, cognitive processes might
cal models to understand how the conflict between leader
also affect the evolution of agent preferences and lead to
and follower affects the evolution of despotism (Summers,
a lower level of despotism e.g. followers predict that a
2005). These models have identified the important factors
low level of despotism favour their positions. This differ-
behind the evolution of inequality such as the cost of leav-
ence suggests that integrating cognitive processes might be
ing the group or the relative cost of conflict with the leader.
crucial to limit despotism in artificial social systems and
Later on, evolutionary models have extended and confirmed
would be worth investigating. Yet, it is important to note
this work by taking in account many connected large groups
that our results still hold over large time scales in which
(Hooper et al., 2010; Powers and Lehmann, 2014). Our re-
blind evolutionaryprocesses are a good predictor of cultural
sults complete this previous work by integrating an opinion
change (Boyd and Richerson, 1985). Another assumption
formation process and by identifying a new crucial factor
made concerns the division of the society into only three
in the evolution of inequality: the distribution of influence
groups and with only one leader. In natural social systems,
itself as modelled by social network structure.
hierarchy can be composed of many more layers. But this
On the whole, providing a complete explanation of the is unlikely to change our qualitative results since the results
evolution of group organization and complexity is a cru- presented are explained by the asymmetrical distribution of
cial goal in research (Szathma´ry, 2015). The “iron law of influence. Nonetheless, it is crucial to explore similarly the
oligarchy” provides such a scenario by stating that (i) hier- evolution of despotism in other hierarchical network struc-
archy emerges when groups grow bigger as a consequence tures. Finally, we have considered here a simplified version
of egalitarian organization becoming more costly, and (ii) oftherevolutionprocess. Weingast (1997)haveuseda game
despotism appears as a consequence of hierarchy distribut- theory model to show that the cost of coordination required
ing political power asymmetrically. However, this scenario to make a revolution would lead to either a fair society or a
is missing a micro-level explanation (Mitchell, 1915). The strongly despotic one. In our model, this limit induced by
model developed here has shown that an asymmetric distri- coordination is represented by the minimum amount of de-
bution of influence is sufficient to lead to despotism and in- fiant individuals required to start a revolution. Similarly we
equality. Along the same line, previouswork has shown that find that society can switch from equality to strong despo-
this asymmetric distribution of influence tends to evolve in tism, but we also show that groups might vary widely along
large groups to reduce the cost of organization (Perret et al., this range. In addition, our results demonstrate that this ef-
2017). Taken together, this work draws a first outline of a fect is affected by the structure of the social network. How-
mechanistic description of the iron law of oligarchy. ever, extending the current model to integrate more explic-
itly revolution as a Volunteer’s Dilemma game, along with
Finally, our model predicts that the capacity of follow-
individual strategies for playing this game, could provide a
ers to efficiently control leader’s decision is crucial to limit
better insight on the evolutionarydynamics of despotism. In
despotism. This result is supported by evidence from be-
particular, it could clarify the impact of follower’s connect-
havioural economics experiments. In particular, two eco-
edness on the evolution of despotism.
nomics games called the ultimatum and the dictator game
implement a similar version of the presented model. In the
Conclusion
ultimatum game, one of two players has to decide how to
split a fixed amount of money and the second player can Social systems organised in hierarchy tend to develop into
choose to either accept it and both receive their shares; or despotism with inequality created by and for the leaders. It
refuse it in which case neither receive anything. However, has been proposed that the sole asymmetrical distribution
in the variant called dictator game, the second player can’t of power is enough to lead to such transition. In particular,
decide to accept or refuse. Experimentalresults show that in the leader and its influential clique could bias the opinion
the ultimatum game, the proposer keeps in average 60% of of weakly connected followers, ultimately crippling the fol-

lowers’ capacity to control the leader’s decision. Yet, this Miller, D. C. (1958). Decision-making cliques in community
scenario was missing of a model integrating and testing ex- power structures: A comparative study of an American
and English city. Source: American Journal of Sociology,
plicitly these mechanisms. To fill this gap, we have devel-
64(3):299–310.
oped a model integrating evolutionary processes, opinion
formation and interactional justice. We have used numeri- Mitchell, R. (1915). Political parties: A sociological study of
cal simulations to investigate the impact of centralization of the oligarchical tendencies of modern democracy. McMas-
ter University Archive for the History of Economic Thought.
the socialnetworkonthe evolutionofthe levelofdespotism.
Ourresults havedemonstratedthat thecentralizationofa so-
Moran,P.A.P.(1958). Randomprocessesingenetics. Proceedings
cial network would lead to higher despotism and inequality. of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 54:1958.
It predicts that a transition from equality to despotism will
North, D. C. (1990). Institutions, institutional change, and eco-
happen in presence of (i) highly influential individuals with
nomic performance. Cambridge University Press.
a preferential access of resources; and (ii) lowly connected
followers. In addition, our model demonstrates how a low- Oosterbeek, H., Sloof, R., and van de Kuilen, G. (2004). Cultural
differences inultimatum game experiments: Evidence from a
level process such as opinion formation can strongly drive
meta-analysis. Experimental Economics, 7(2):171–188.
the evolution of a higher property, here the group organiza-
tion. Ostrom,E.(1990). Governingthecommons. CambridgeUniversity
Press.
References
Perret, C., Powers, S. T., and Hart, E. (2017). Emergence of hier-
Boyd, R. and Richerson, P. J. (1985). Culture and the evolutionary
archy from the evolution of individual influence in an agent-
process. University of Chicago Press.
based model. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
Artificial Life 2017, pages 348–355, Cambridge. MIT Press.
Buston, P., Reeve, H., Cant, M., Vehrencamp, S., and Emlen, S.
(2007). Reproductive skew and the evolution of group disso-
Pitt, J. (2017). Interactional justice and self-governance of open
lution tactics: a synthesis of concession and restraint models.
self-organising systems. In 2017 IEEE 11th International
Animal Behaviour, 74(6):1643–1654.
Conference on Self-Adaptive and Self-Organizing Systems
(SASO), Tucson, AZ, USA. IEEE.
Carneiro, R. L. (1970). A theory of the origin of the state. Science,
169:733–738.
Pitt, J., Schaumeier, J., and Artikis, A. (2012). Axiomatization
Chih-Han, Y., Werfel, J. K., and Nagpal, R. (2010). Collective of socio-economic principles for self-organizing institutions.
Decision-Making in Multi-Agent Systems by Implicit Lead- ACM Transactions on Autonomous and Adaptive Systems,
ership. 7(4):1–39.
Engel, C. (2010). Dictator games: A meta study. MPI Collective Powers, S. T. and Lehmann, L. (2014). An evolutionary model ex-
Goods Preprint No. 2010/07. plaining the Neolithic transition from egalitarianism to lead-
ership and despotism. Proceedings of the Royal Society B:
Erdo˝s, P.andRenyi, A.(1959). Onrandom graphs I. Publicationes Biological Sciences, 281(1791):20141349–20141349.
Mathematicae, 6:290–297.
Pugliese, F., Acerbi, A., and Marocco, D. (2015). Emergence of
Gavrilets, S.,Auerbach, J., and VanVugt, M. (2016). Convergence
leadership in a group of autonomous robots. PLoS ONE,
to consensus in heterogeneous groups and the emergence of
10(9):1–21.
informal leadership. Scientific Reports, 6(January).
Schermerhorn, J. R. (2012). Organizational behavior. Wiley.
Hayden, B.andVilleneuve,S.(2010). Whobenefitsfromcomplex-
ity? A view from Futuna. In Pathways to Power, chapter 5, Summers,K. (2005). Theevolutionary ecology of despotism. Evo-
pages 95–145. Springer New York. lution and Human Behavior, 26(1):106–135.
Hooper, P. L., Kaplan, H. S., and Boone, J. L. (2010). A theory of
Szathma´ry, E. (2015). Toward major evolutionary transitions the-
leadership in human cooperative groups. Journal of Theoret-
ory 2.0. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
ical Biology, 265(4):633–646.
the United States of America, 112(33):10104–10111.
Johnstone, R. A. (2000). Models of reproductive skew: A review
Weingast, B. R. (1997). The Political Foundations of Democracy
and synthesis. Ethology, 106(1):5–26.
and the Rule of Law. American Political Science Review,
91(2):245–263.
Kaplan, H. S., Hooper, P. L., and Gurven, M. (2009). The evo-
lutionary and ecological roots of human social organization.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biologi-
cal Sciences, 364(1533):3289–3299.
Lieberman, E.,Hauert,C.,andNowak, M.A.(2005). Evolutionary
dynamics on graphs. Nature, 433(7023):312–316.
Mattison, S. M., Smith, E. A., Shenk, M. K., and Cochrane, E. E.
(2016). The evolution of inequality. Evolutionary Anthropol-
ogy, 25(4):184–199.