MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018) Preprint 12 June 2019 Compiled using MNRAS LATEX style file v3.0
The Feasibility of Magnetic Reconnection Powered Blazar
Flares from Synchrotron Self-Compton Emission
Paul J. Morris,(cid:63) William J. Potter, and Garret Cotter
Oxford Astrophysics. Denys Wilkinson Building, Keble Road, Oxford, OX1 3RH, United Kingdom
Accepted 2019 March 20. Received 2019 February 21; in original form 2018 October 9
9102 nuJ 11  ]EH.hp-ortsa[  2v93140.0181:viXra
ABSTRACT
Order of magnitude variability has been observed in the blazar sub-class of Active
Galactic Nuclei on minute timescales. These high-energy flares are often difficult to
explain with shock acceleration models due to the small size of the inferred emitting
region, with recent particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations showing that magnetic reconnec-
tion is a promising alternative mechanism. Here, we present a macroscopic emission
model physically motivated by PIC simulations, where the energy for particle acceler-
ation originates from the reconnecting magnetic field. We track the radial growth and
relative velocity of a reconnecting plasmoid, modelling particle acceleration and radia-
tive losses from synchrotron and synchrotron self-Compton (SSC) emission. To test
the viability of magnetic reconnection as the mechanism behind rapid blazar flares we
simultaneously fit our model to the observed light-curve and SED from the 2016 TeV
flare of BL Lacertae. We find generally that, without considering external photons,
reconnecting plasmoids are unable to produce Compton-dominant TeV flares and so
cannot reproduce the observations due to overproduction of synchrotron emission. Ad-
ditionally, problematically large plasmoids, comparable in size to the entire jet radius,
are required to emit sufficient SSC gamma-rays to be observable. However, our plas-
moid model can reproduce the rapid TeV lightcurve of the flare, demonstrating that
reconnection is able to produce rapid, powerful TeV flares on observed timescales. We
conclude that while reconnection can produce SSC flares on the correct timescales,
the primary source of TeV emission cannot be SSC and the size of plasmoids required
may be implausibly large.
Key words: acceleration of particles – galaxies: jets – magnetic reconnection – BL
Lacertae objects: general – gamma-rays: general
1 INTRODUCTION leptonic models, (e.g. Mastichiadis & Kirk 1997; Kirk et al.
1998; Chiaberge & Ghisellini 1999; Li & Kusunose 2000;
Blazars are the most luminous sub-class of Active Galactic
B¨ottcher & Chiang 2002) the higher energy bump is inter-
Nuclei (AGN) (Urry & Padovani 1995) being those which
preted as inverse Compton (IC) emission (e.g. Longair 2011)
have one of their relativistic plasma jets pointed towards us.
where the relativistic electrons up-scatter the synchrotron
This results in Doppler boosting which causes substantial
seed photons (synchrotron self-Compton, SSC) or photons
amplification of the emitted flux from the jet, to the extent
external to the jet to higher energies. Other models assume
that it can dominate over any emission from the accretion
an additional hadronic component of the jet plasma (e.g.
disc or host galaxy.
Mannheim 1993; Dar & Laor 1997; Schopper et al. 2002;
Blazars have a characteristic double humped continuum
B¨ottcher et al. 2013). These models include collisions be-
emission spectrum, spanning the electromagnetic spectrum
tween relativistic protons, causing the production of neu-
from radio frequencies to very high energy (VHE) TeV γ-
tral pions, which then decay into a photon pair and pro-
rays. The lower energy hump is caused by relativistic elec-
vide the high energy blazar emission. Although these mod-
trons and positrons undergoing helical motion in the mag-
els have provided some good fits to the data, they often
netic field of the jet and emitting synchrotron radiation. In
require a total power in relativistic protons many orders
of magnitude higher than the observed bolometric power
of the relativistic jet or the estimated Eddington luminos-
(cid:63) E-mail: paul.morris@physics.ox.ac.uk (PJM)
© 2018 The Authors

2 P. J. Morris et al.
F = j × B
ity (B¨ottcher et al. 2013; Zdziarski & B¨ottcher 2015) which
is hard to justify.
Many models with varying jet geometry have been pos-
tulated to explain the broadband SEDs. Commonly, the
dominant emission region within the jet is approximated as
NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNN
a compact spherical region (e.g. Bloom & Marscher 1996;
B¨ottcher & Chiang 2002; Tsang & Kirk 2007). Other models
assume the jet has conical geometry such as the pioneering
paper by Blandford & K¨onigl (1979) and more recent work
by Marscher (1980); Konigl (1981); Ghisellini et al. (1985) F = j × B
or the relativistic fluid models of Potter & Cotter (2012,
Figure 1. Schematic illustrating magnetic reconnection. Oppo-
2013a). The large scale conical jet geometry is supported
sitely orientated magnetic field lines converge, creating a current
by VLBI observations from Nakamura & Asada (2013) and
sheet between them. In this figure, the direction of the current
Hada et al. (2018).
density j is into the plane of the paper, such that the direction of
Though the aforementioned models have in general been
the Lorentz force, F = j×B is indicated by the grey arrows. This
very successful in explaining quiescent emission in relativis-
force acts on the field lines forcing them into the reconnection
tic jets, problems still remain when adding time variability.
region. It can be seen that the direction of j × B changes when
One possible and popular explanation is that acceleration the magnetic field lines reconnect, helping to expel material from
occurs via internal shocks within the jet, caused by varia- the reconnection region. This creates a gas pressure gradient al-
tions in the bulk Lorentz factor of the jet leading to collisions lowing fresh plasma to flow into the reconnection region and be
of different emitting regions. Shock acceleration is a well accelerated outwards at the expense of magnetic energy.
established mechanism for particle acceleration (Bell 1978;
Blandford & Eichler 1987; Spada et al. 2001), yet light travel
time arguments prohibit large scale shocks from powering particle acceleration with spectral indices between 1 and 2
the most rapid flares (Aharonian et al. 2007). Shock accel- (Sironi & Spitkovsky 2014; Guo et al. 2014; Ball et al. 2018).
eration also requires particles cross the shock front multiple Whilst the exact attribution of the acceleration mechanisms
times to be accelerated up to the highest energies, which remains unclear, it has been postulated that the mean en-
is difficult to achieve if the shock is magnetised and rela- ergy gain of the particles is approximately first order and
tivistic (Sironi et al. 2015; Bell et al. 2018). These are likely therefore analogous to the exponential increase in energy
conditions in the case of astrophysical jets. provided by shock models (de Gouveia dal Pino & Lazarian
TeV flares have been observed to occur on minute time 2005; Guo et al. 2014; de Gouveia Dal Pino & Kowal 2015;
scales for several active galaxies (Aharonian et al. 2007; del Valle et al. 2016). Other hypotheses include those where
Albert et al. 2007; Aleksi´c et al. 2014; Abeysekara et al. the acceleration is dominated by the reconnection electric
2018). Such observations pose significant theoretical chal- field (E ≈ −v×B) (e.g. Kagan et al. 2015; Isliker et al. 2017).
lenges, since light travel time arguments imply that the ra- Generally, it seems likely that there is some contribution to
dius, R, of the emitting region for a flare of duration t var from particle acceleration from both mechanisms.
a source at redshift z cannot exceed (e.g. Levinson 2007), Attempts to scale up these PIC simulations to macro-
scopic scales have been made, with the jets-in-a-jet model of
ct δ
var
R ≤ . (1) Giannios et al. (2009) containing blobs moving relativisti-
(1+ z)
cally within a jet indicating that it is possible to produce
For example, taking a z = 1 source exhibiting a 10 minute flares on the rapid observed timescales. Further work by
flare and with a typical Doppler factor of δ ≈ 10 implies a (Nalewajko et al. 2011) investigating the radiative prop-
relatively compact region size of R ≤ 9×1011 m. erties of these mini-jets found an overproduction of X-ray
The necessity for a compact emitting region has led to emission. Giannios (2013) discuss characteristic flaring pro-
a rise in popularity of magnetic reconnection as a mecha- files from models of plasmoid driven reconnection where fast
nism which may be able to provide the required particle flares from large“monster”plasmoids are superimposed onto
acceleration and compact emission regions needed for TeV emission from the reconnection current layer. These results
flaring. The original framework for magnetic reconnection have been initially promising, and so warrant further inves-
was developed by Sweet (1958) and Parker (1957), yet this tigation.
so called Sweet-Parker model is too slow to reproduce the Whilst PIC simulations have demonstrated some ini-
observed timescale in solar flares (Galtier 2016). Analytic tial promise with regards to the feasibility of reconnection
results have indicated that faster reconnection may be re- powered blazar flares, their computationally expensive na-
alised if the current sheet is subjected to instabilities which ture restricts them to small spatial scales, as the plasma
cause it to fragment into a chain of magnetic islands, or skin depth is resolved (e.g. Sironi & Spitkovsky 2014; Sironi
plasmoids (Loureiro et al. 2007; Uzdensky et al. 2010). Sub- et al. 2016). They are therefore constrained to smaller re-
sequent research utilising Particle-in-cell (PIC) simulations gions relative to the size of astrophysical jets required to
have verified that these effects can indeed cause more rapid model blazar flaring. In this paper, we present a macroscopic
reconnection (e.g Sironi & Spitkovsky 2014). The plasmoids emission model, which is physically motivated by the results
which form from the initial current sheet have a range of of PIC simulations. Our model computes the time evolution
properties from being large and mildly relativistic to small of a reconnecting plasmoid whose radius and velocity evolve
and ultra-relativistic (Petropoulou et al. 2016). Collisions as it travels through the reconnection layer. We calculate the
and subsequent merging of these plasmoids can result in acceleration and radiative losses of the electrons and com-
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

|    |
|:---|
| NN |

|    |
|:---|
| NN |

Reconnection Powered Blazar Flares from SSC 3
R
0
v
blob
Figure 2. Schematic of the model. The diagram shows the evolution of a single plasmoid as it travels through the reconnection layer
between regions of opposing magnetic field lines. Darker shading represents later times. The radius of the plasmoid steadily increases over
time, as we assume it continuously merges with like plasmoids in the reconnection layer. In our model, we parameterise the space and
relative velocity between plasmoids using the parameter f and assume the acceleration timescale is the merge timescale, which is defined
in Eqn. 3. The plasmoid velocity also varies with time as it is accelerated from its point of origin in the reconnection layer (see Sironi
et al. 2016). The total energy of the plasma is conserved in the reconnection process, so the energy for particle acceleration comes from
the magnetic energy density, causing the magnetic field decreases with time. We assume the plasmoid remains in the reconnection layer
until the energy initially stored in the reconnecting field has been transferred to particles and radiation. This defines the final plasmoid
radius, R , and the total distance travelled by the blob in the reconnection layer, L.
f
pare our results to SED data for BL Lacertae, and output ergies from our model to evaluate the emission timescales.
flaring profiles at TeV energies. Here, particle acceleration is In this section we outline the physical motivation for our
computed for the constituent particle population contained model before summarising the particle acceleration and ra-
within a growing and accelerating plasmoid in a reconnec- diative loss computation in our code.
tion layer, offering an improvement on previous models. We We assume a leptonic jet consisting entirely of electrons
discuss the required physical parameters, and their implica- and positrons (hereafter electrons) and consequently model
tions for the feasibility of reconnection powered blazar flares. the acceleration and radiative losses for electrons that have
The structure of the paper is as follows: In Section 2, entered the reconnection layer. The model begins with a
we begin by outlining the physical motivation of our recon- single relativistic plasmoid, which is approximated as an ini-
nection model and discuss the particle acceleration process tially highly magnetised sphere (see Sironi et al. 2016). The
and computation of the radiative losses. In Section 3 we total energy density in the rest frame of this plasmoid is
discuss general properties of the high energy flaring profiles initially given by,
and SEDs produced by our model before presenting the fit of
our model to the 2016 TeV flare of BL Lacertae (Abeysekara
U = U +U = (σ +1)U , (2)
et al. 2018). We then discuss the implications of our results TOT B,0 e,0 0 e,0
with respect to PIC simulations, and constrain the location
where the magnetic energy density is U = B2/2µ for mag-
B 0
of the reconnection layer within the jet plasma before stating
netic field strength B. The ratio of magnetic to particle en-
our conclusions in Section 4.
ergy densities, σ = U /U , defines the magnetisation and the
B e
subscript 0 denotes initial values. We consider the total mag-
netic field to constitute the reconnecting magnetic field, B ,
rec
which is depleted as magnetic energy is transferred to parti-
2 RECONNECTION MODEL
cles, and a guide field, B , which remains constant and does
g
We aim to model the emission across the entire electromag- not reconnect. The total magnetic field in the model is given
netic spectrum for a radiatively emitting reconnecting plas- by the sum of the guide and reconnecting field components.
moid, paying particular attention to the high energy gamma- Throughout the computation, magnetic energy is converted
ray emission. As reconnection has been postulated to explain to particle energy. This causes the value of B to decrease
rec
TeV flares in blazars, we output flaring profiles at these en- with time as the magnetic energy is transferred to particles.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

4 P. J. Morris et al.
B , B and σ are initialised as free parameters. We assume where t is the time as measured in the jet rest frame.
rec g 0
that the emitting plasmoid remains in pressure equilibrium
with the surrounding plasma, and for this it must maintain
a constant energy density (pressure), U . 2.1 Particle Acceleration
TOT
We assume an initial radius of R = 1010 m. This value
0 The objective of this work is to model emission from an
is ≈ 104 times smaller than typical radii used to model the
accelerating and growing plasmoid in a reconnection layer.
whole jet for multiple blazar sources (e.g. Ghisellini et al.
To accurately model radiative losses, the underlying electron
2002; B¨ottcher et al. 2013) and our tests have shown indi-
population in the reconnecting plasmoid needs to be tracked
vidual plasmoids smaller than this size do not radiate enough
as it undergoes particle acceleration. To restrict the number
to be observable and so will not be astrophysically relevant,
of free parameters, the initial electron population residing in
justifying this assumption. We assume that the flaring emis-
the emitting plasmoid is approximated as a δ-function with
sion is dominated by this single plasmoid, which is approxi-
Lorentz factor γ = 10. We investigated different functional
mately spherical in its rest frame. To test whether reconnec-
forms for the initial electron population, but found they had
tion is a feasible energy source for powering flares we allow
a negligible influence on the end result. From Eqn. 2, the
the plasmoid to grow in the reconnection layer, assuming a
initial magnetisation, σ , is used to set the initial value of U
0 e
growth rate which depends on the merge timescale, τ ,
merge
and therefore the electron number density in the plasmoid.
and relative blob velocity in the jet rest frame, v ,
b It is necessary to model the evolution of the electron
spectrum to obtain the dynamically evolving radiative losses
R(t)
τ = τ = f , (3) from them. In general, the resultant spectrum from a particle
acc merge
v (t)
b acceleration process can be found by solving the diffusion-
where f is a dimensionless free parameter quantifying the loss equation (Longair 2011),
plasmoid spacing and relative velocity in the reconnection
layer and R is the radius. Following Sironi et al. (2016), we
dN(E) ∂ N(E)
obtain the blob velocity, v = β c, by solving, = D∇2 N + [b(E)N(E)]− +Q(E), (8)
b b dt ∂E τ
esc
(cid:18) (cid:19) where the terms on the right hand side quantify diffu-
√ 0.12x
Γ bβ b = σ 0tanh √ , (4) sion, energy gains or losses, escape from the acceleration
σ R
0
region and repeated particle injection. Charged parti-
where x is the distance travelled by the blob in the recon-
cles in a uniform magnetic field undergo helical motion,
nection layer and Γ is the Lorentz factor of the blob. We
b with gyro-radius r and period τ defined as (Longair 2011),
g g
assume an initial value of x in Eqn. 4 equal to the initial
plasmoid radius. Rearranging this equation leads to, r g = γ em |e B| |v| sinθ, (9) τ g = 2π cr g , (10)
√ (cid:16) (cid:17)
0.12x
σ 0tanh √ where v is the velocity of an electron of energy E, B is the
σ R
β = 0 (5)
b (cid:114) magnetic field strength and θ is the pitch angle between B
(cid:16)√ (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:17)2
1+ σ tanh √0.12x and the direction of motion. We assume a tangled field so
0
σ R
0 that diffusion out of the region is approximately a random
We assume that the plasmoid radius grows steadily whilst in walk with mean free path ≈ r (Bohm diffusion (e.g. Spitzer
g
the reconnection layer, see Fig. 2. The rate of radial growth
1960)). Since the plasmoid is travelling relativistically to-
can be calculated from the condition that the plasmoid vol-
wards the observer and its emission is Doppler boosted, we
ume doubles in a time τ , and is given by,
merge ignore the un-beamed emission from electrons which have
left the plasmoid as a first approximation. It is unknown
dR 21/3R − R (cid:16) (cid:17) v (t) v (t) how efficient magnetic reconnection is as an acceleration
= = 21 3 −1 b ≈ 0.26 b . (6)
dt τ f f mechanism, so we parameterise our acceleration term as
merge
b = −αE/τ (Longair 2011), where α is a dimensionless
merge
We assume f cannot be less than one else single plasmoids
free parameter quantifying the average energy gain per par-
will be unable to form. This gives a maximum possible ra-
ticle per merging event, thus b is the average energy gain
dial growth rate of 0.26c. We assume that the value of U
e
per unit time in the model. Without particle injection, Eqn.
is constant during the merging process, such that electrons
8 becomes,
are injected over time at the same rate as the radial growth
in Eqn. 6. This is the case if the two merging plasmoids
have indentical properties. In the event of a negligible guide dN(E) −N(E) (cid:16)r g(cid:17)2 αN(E) αE dN(E) N(E)
= − − − +N(cid:219) ,
field where the emitting plasmoid becomes particle domi- rad
dt τ R τ τ dE τ
g merge merge esc
10−3,
nated with σ < we assume that the emitting blob is
(11)
no longer in the reconnection layer to define the final radius,
R , and total time, t spent in reconnection later in the plas- where the first term describes Bohm diffusion, where it is
f f
moid rest frame. We estimate a lower limit to the size of assumed that if the electron gyroradius exceeds the radius
the reconnection layer, L, by computing the total distance of the emitting plasmoid containing it, it can leave the plas-
travelled by the emitting plasmoid in the jet rest frame, moid and no longer contributes to the emission. The sec-
ond and third terms describe the electron energy gains due
∫ t f to acceleration, and conservation of particle number. The
L = v (t)dt, (7)
b fourth term quantifies electrons which leave the acceleration
t
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

Reconnection Powered Blazar Flares from SSC 5
Potter & Cotter (2012). The synchrotron power for a radi-
ating electron is given by,
4σ
P = T β2 E2 U , (14)
sync B
3m2c3
e
where σ is the Thomson cross section. We assume that the
T
synchrotron emission becomes optically thick when the opti-
cal depth is one, and use the Rayleigh -Jeans approximation
for the synchrotron emission (Longair 2011). It is assumed
that all electrons within a bin emit all of their energy at the
critical frequency, defined as (e.g. Longair 2011),
3γ2eB
ν = , (15)
c
4πm
e
and is the peak emission frequency of radiation emitted
by an electron of Lorentz factor γ. Similarly, the inverse-
Figure 3. Demonstration of accuracy for the particle acceleration Compton power is,
code. The electron population at various times is represented by
4σ
the grey dashed line, which converges to the numerical solution P = T β2 E2 U , (16)
IC rad
3m2c3
indicated by the cyan line. The analytical steady state solution is
e
indicated by the black dotted line, with only slight discrepancies
where we assume U is the photon energy density of the
to the numerical solution at low electron counts. The converged rad
synchrotron field, which is defined as
electron spectral index from our code differs with the analytical
solution index by less than half a percent.
(cid:17)−1∫ ∞
(cid:16)
U = 4πR2 l N (E)dE, (17)
rad c γ
E
min
region per unit time, and the final term describes popu- where N γ(E) is the number of synchrotron seed photons with
lation changes due to radiative losses, which are discussed energy E. It is assumed the radiation emitted in one second
in Section 2.2. Ignoring the contribution of radiative losses, is contained within a spherical shell of thickness one light
Eqn. 11 can be solved analytically giving the standard steady second, l c, and volume 4πR2l c (Potter & Cotter 2012). This
state (N(cid:219) = 0) solution, leads to the definition of N(cid:219) in Eqn. 11 as,
rad
d[P(E)N(E)]
−(cid:16) 1+τmerge(cid:17) (cid:32) τ r g2 (cid:33) N(cid:219) = , (18)
merge rad
N(E) = AE ατesc exp − (12) dE
ατ R2
g
which describes radiative losses for electrons of energy E.
To solve this numerically, our electron population is divided
which we use as a simple test of numerical convergence for
into bins. Each bin gains electrons as the higher energy elec-
our code, demonstrated in Fig. 3. Substituting in Eqn. 3 and
trons radiate and reduce their energies and loses electrons
rewriting Eqn. 9 in terms of energy allows the value of the
which radiate energy. As we are particularly interested in
exponential cutoff, E , to be determined as,
max
modelling TeV flares, we need to account for Klein-Nishina
effects which suppress the emission of high energy photons.
E = E (cid:32) τ merge r g2 (cid:33)−1 = 2πeαRBv b , (13) T &h Ge oK ul le din 1- 9N 7i 0s )h ,ina cross section is given by (e.g Blumenthal
max
ατ R2 f
g
dσ 1 (cid:16) (cid:17)
= α2 r2 P2 P + P−1 −1+cos2 φ , (19)
c
giving the intuitive result that larger blobs can hold higher dΩ 2
energy electrons with larger gyro-radii. We do not expect a where α is the fine structure constant and r is the classical
c
substantial number of electrons to escape from the recon- electron radius. The term P is the energy ratio of the out-
necting plasmoid as opposed to the case of a shock front, going to incoming photon in the rest frame of the electron
so we set τ esc = ∞ (see Guo et al. 2014). From Eqn. 12 the and is defined as,
power law index on the electron spectrum should therefore
1
converge ≈ 1. The parameters α and f are left as free. P = , (20)
E
1+ γ (1−cosφ)
m c2
e
where φ is the angle between the incident photon of en-
ergy E and the outgoing photon. After extracting the ra-
γ
2.2 Radiative Losses
diative energy losses from the emitting plasmoid, its radius
We explicitly compute the emission and radiative losses will decrease to maintain pressure equilibrium with its sur-
from synchrotron and SSC processes, which we assume roundings. This effect leads to a rise in the electron number
to be the dominant emission mechanisms from the recon- density in the plasmoid, and a loss of total energy over time.
necting plasmoid. Our method follows that prescribed in It ensures total energy conservation in the model and allows
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

6 P. J. Morris et al.
the emitting plasmoid to either shrink or grow, depending
Case 1
on the competing effects of radiative losses and plasmoid
growth from merging. This leads to a number of possible
scenarios, which are illustrated in Fig. 4.
2.3 TeV Opacity
Simulations of TeV flares are further complicated by the
requirement that the TeV photons must be able to leave the
emitting region, with regions containing dense photon fields
Observable Plasmoid
being opaque to high energy photons (Gould & Schr´eder
1966). It is possible for a high energy photon of energy E to (a) Case 1: The plasmoid grows continually during its time in
γ
interact with a lower energy photon to produce an electron- thereconnectionlayer.Theseplasmoidscangrowlargeenough
that their emitted radiation can be observed.
positron pair, with the threshold energy of the lower energy
photon given by (Gould & Schr´eder 1967),
2m2c4 Case 2
E = e , (21)
thresh
E (1−cosθ)
γ
where θ is the angle of incidence between the two photons.
The cross section for γγ → e+ e− is,
1 (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:20) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:18) 1+ β(cid:19) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:21)
σ = πr2 1− β2 3− β4 ln −2β 2− β2 , (22)
γγ c
2 1− β
where β gives the velocity of the pair-produced electron-
positron pair in the centre-of-mass frame and r is the classi- Extreme Radiative Losses
c
cal electron radius. The total optical depth is then computed
(b) Case 2: the radiative losses from the emitting electrons are
by (e.g. Potter & Cotter 2013c),
so extreme that they cannot stay at high energies. The blob
therefore shrinks continuously to maintain pressure equilib-
∞ θ=π rium, and never grows large enough to be observed.
(cid:213) (cid:213) sinθ
τ (E ) = R(1−cosθ)n σ dEdθ, (23)
γγ SSC sync γγ
2
E=E θ=0
thresh
Case 3
where n is the photon number density from the syn-
sync
chrotron emission. The SSC emission is then attenuated by
(cid:0) (cid:1)
a factor of exp −τ (E ) . Here we neglect the contribu-
γγ SSC
tion of the electron pair cascade produced by this process
because we find the observable plasmoids are largely opti-
cally thin to TeV radiation and because the TeV luminosity
is much lower than the GeV luminosity, so only a relatively
small number of pairs will be produced when compared with
the existing electron population.
Oscillating Plasmoid
(c) Case 3: The plasmoid initially contains electrons with ex-
2.4 Doppler Boosting
treme radiative losses, causing the radius to contract to main-
tain pressure equilibrium with the surrounding plasma. From
An important property of reconnection generated plasmoids
Eqn. 3, this reduces τ , increasing the acceleration effi-
is that they can have bulk Lorentz factors that exceed that merge
ciency which supports the population of high energy electrons
of the jet, and thus emission from them can be more strongly
and allowing for some net growth. Since τ is the char-
merge
Doppler boosted than the surrounding quiescent plasma. To
acteristic acceleration time, a smaller value also causes more
calculate the observed Lorentz factor of the plasmoid, Γ ,
p rapid particle acceleration, which increases the total radiative
we need to consider the relative components of its velocity
losses. If the losses are extreme enough, this can cause a net
aligned with and perpendicular to the jet motion. Following contraction of the plasmoid radius. The radius of the emitting
Petropoulou et al. (2016), the observed Doppler factor, Γ , plasmoid oscillates to maintain pressure equilibrium with the
p
for a plasmoid travelling with Lorentz factor Γ at angle θ(cid:48) surroundingplasmadependingonwhethertheplasmoidmerg-
b
relative to the jet axis in the rest frame of the jet is, ing or radiative losses are dominant. These plasmoids do not
reach the required radii needed to be observable. This process
does not happen indefinitely, as the plasmoid still suffers a
(cid:16) (cid:17)1
Γ = Γ Γ (cid:0) 1+ β β cosθ(cid:48)(cid:1) = 1− β2 2 . (24) loss of energy over time, which reduces the magnetic field and
p j b j b p
therefore the radiative losses.
The observed lab frame angle of the reconnecting plasmoid
to the jet axis, θ, is defined by, Figure 4.The model presented hereproducesemittingplasmoids
whose evolution typically follows one of the above scenarios.
(cid:48)
β sinθ
tanθ = b , (25)
Γ (cid:0) β + β cosθ(cid:48)(cid:1)
j j b
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

Reconnection Powered Blazar Flares from SSC 7
consequently giving a Doppler factor of,
Table 1. Table listing the final radius and time the plasmoid was
in the reconnection layer as measured in its rest frame, for the
1 fits displayed in Fig. 5a-j.
δ = , (26)
p (cid:0) (cid:1)
Γ 1− β cosω
p p
Figure Final Radius R (m) Duration (days)
f
where the difference between the angle of the plasmoid to the
observer and the observers angle to the jet axis is ω = θ−θ . 6 1.2×1014 46.3
obs 5a 1.4×1014 56.6
Using primes to denote the blob rest frame therefore results
5b 7.0×1012 2.9
in amplification of ν F = δ4+Kν F , where K is
obs ν,obs p emit ν,emit 5c 7.3×1013 28.7
the k-correction.
5d 2.2×1014 86.8
5e 1.4×1014 56.7
5f 2.8×1013 11.1
2.5 Code Setup 5g 1.3×1014 43.8
5h 6.8×1013 56.7
The code utilises an explicit method with adaptive time-
5i 1.4×1014 56.7
steps to solve the differential equation defined in Eqn. 11,
5j 1.4×1014 53.7
which returns the accelerated electron spectrum. In the
model, the constant evolution of the electron spectrum, dy-
namic magnetic field and growing radius of the emitting
entire parameter space was performed, outputting approxi-
plasmoid mean that the system is not in equilibrium. As
mately 10,000 SEDs. This parameter sweep included mag-
the emitting blob evolves, the time-step dt changes dramat- netic field values from 10−7−10−3 T and initial magnetisation
ically. This is because from Eqn. 3 the characteristic merge values in the range 10−106, each of which were logarithmi-
time changes as the radius changes, and the shortest radia-
cally spaced in the parameter sweep. We investigated accel-
tive lifetime is a function of the evolving energy spectrum eration parameters in the range α = 1 − 20 and f = 1 − 20.
(see Eqns. 14 and 16). Accordingly, using an adaptive time-
Both of these were linearly spaced. From the resultant SEDs,
step method was required to ensure the code ran fast and
we note the following general properties:
efficiently. This works by estimating the error in the discre-
• All of the produced SEDs had emission that was
tised electron population by comparing the population after
synchrotron-dominated.
one time-step to that in two half time-steps. If the error is
larger that one part in 106, the time-step is halved to in- • The model can produce different characteristic flare
profiles. These either have a slow rise and rapid decline,
crease accuracy. If the error is below this tolerated value,
or vice versa (see Fig. 6 and Fig. 7). We find that that the
the time-step was doubled to ensure speed and efficiency.
profile of the flare depends on τ and the magnetisation.
This allowed the code to run in approximately 5 minutes. merge
This is discussed in Section 3.5.
The code was written in C, and made use of the OpenMP
• The maximum electron energy is determined by an equi-
module to parallelise the computations.
librium between particle acceleration and radiative losses.
From Eqns. 14 and 16, the smallest radiative time-step
• The power in SSC emission follows the relation P ∝ R
is that of the highest energy electrons, which needs to be SSC
(see Eqns. 27 and 28) with a full discussion in Section
resolved by our code. To account for the computationally
3.4. It follows that larger plasmoids output proportionally
expensive nature of explicitly computing the radiative losses
more SSC than plasmoids with smaller radii, and produce
and Klein-Nishina cross section, the radiative losses are only
SEDs with increased Compton-dominance. Subsequently,
recomputed if the highest energy bin changes, if the radius
plasmoids that produce enough SSC to be observable in γ-
of the emitting plasmoid has changed by more than 5% or
rays need to be large.
if the minimum electron radiative lifetime is smaller than
• For plasmoids large enough to produce enough SSC to
the acceleration time dt discussed previously to prevent elec-
be observable, Eqn. 5 leads to blob velocity profiles that
trons with fast radiative lifetimes emitting more energy then
peak in the mildly relativistic regime. Plasmoids were found
they have. The code utilises two sets of electron bins. A
to initially accelerate from their birth locations, eventually
fine logarithmic grid of adjacent bin ratios 1.03 is used to
reaching a peak velocity. It was possible for them to slow
accurately compute the particle acceleration, and to save
down slightly at late times.
computation time these were interpolated to a coarse grid
• Smaller, relativistic plasmoids could be produced but
each containing exactly 9 fine bins to compute the radiative
emission from them was heavily synchrotron dominated so
losses. These relative widths were chosen as they provided
they were unable to provide substantial radiative emission
significant speed up to the code and returned results indis-
in the TeV regime.
tinguishable to those relative to using finer bins. Computa-
tion of radiative losses is done with discrete electron bins and
We discuss each of these in the following sections.
employs a similar methodology to Potter & Cotter (2012).
3.2 Dependence on Free Parameters
3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Fig. 5 and Table 1 demonstrate how the observed radiation
from the reconnection model varies with respect to chang-
3.1 Parameter Search Results
ing each of the five main parameters. The maximum electron
To investigate the range of resultant SEDs that our recon- energy was determined from a balance between particle ac-
nection plasmoids could produce, an investigation over the celeration and radiative losses. This dynamically determines
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

8 P. J. Morris et al.
Figure 5. Figure showing how the time-dependent SEDs vary with respect to each model parameter. All changes are relative to the fit
in Fig. 6, of which best fit parameters are listed in Table 2. This fit is shown by the grey silhouette in each panel to allow comparison
of the evolution of the SEDs with respect to each changed parameter. Only one parameter was changed per panel, and is specified in
each. The final radii and plasmoid rest frame times are defined when the magnetic energy in the reconnecting field has been completely
depleted and are given in Table 1. Fainter colours represent SEDs produced at earlier times. The red solid lines are synchrotron radiation,
and the dashed magenta lines SSC. The effects of changing these parameters are discussed in Section 3.2. The flaring data is taken from
Abeysekara et al. (2018) and is indicated by the dark blue circles. Quiescent data is show by the faint cyan circles for comparison (Abdo
et al. 2011).
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

Reconnection Powered Blazar Flares from SSC 9
the maximum synchrotron and SSC emitted photon ener- extremely low σ plasmoids are unlikely to grow large enough
gies, which can be seen to vary through Fig. 5a-f. It can be to be detectable.
seen that small changes in each parameter can significantly • Acceleration parameter, α:
alter the resultant SED. We begin by summarising and ex- The parameter α defines the efficiency of the accelera-
plaining the behaviour of our code with respect to each of tion process. Figs 5e and 5f show that even a relatively
them. small change in α substantially alters the resultant SED. The
higher value of α causes a more rapid transfer of magnetic to
particle energy, more rapidly reducing the magnitude of the
• Initial magnetic field, B = B + B : Fig. 5 magnetic field, much like in Fig. 5c. Thus, higher α leads to
0 rec,0 g,0
shows that an initially higher magnetic field lowers the smaller plasmoids with a higher electron energy cutoff and
maximum emitted energy from both synchrotron and SSC, a correspondingly higher maximum emission energy. Taking
with the synchrotron emission becoming optically thick at this result with the magnetic field dependence in Figs 5a
a higher frequency. From Eqn. 14, the B-field dependancy and b, the plasmoid is therefore capable of reaching larger
of the synchrotron power is P ∝ E2B2, thus the radiative radii when the magnetic field is low and the acceleration
sync
losses are higher for all electron energies and this effect is is inefficient. Table 1 shows a smaller value of α produces
more profound for the highest electron energy populations. larger reconnection plasmoids, and comparing Figs 5e and
Therefore, if B is increased for constant acceleration pa- 5f demonstrates larger plasmoids exhibit greater radiative
0
rameters, the balance between particle acceleration and ra- emission. Thus, if the value of α is too high, although the
diative losses necessarily occurs at a lower electron energy, electron spectrum extends to high energies, the final size of
reflected by the lower maximum energy in the SED curves the emitting plasmoid is too small for it to radiate enough
in Fig. 5b. This property also leads to a denser synchrotron to be observable.
photon field, and therefore a correspondingly higher SSC • Filling Factor, f:
peak, as P ∝ U . Table 1 shows that the both the values An increase in f physically corresponds to more space
SSC rad
of the final radius, R , rest frame run time t and reconnec- between adjacent plasmoids in the reconnection layer, and
f f
tion layer size, L, for Fig. 5b are much lower than for Fig. increases τ from Eqn. 3. For a larger f, we therefore
merge
5a. This arises because the larger radiative losses associated expect to see a reduction in the maximum achievable en-
with a higher B at the same σ mean that the total energy ergy as the acceleration takes longer and so can be balanced
0 0
is more quickly depleted leading to a smaller final radius by weaker radiative losses, which is apparent from Fig. 5e.
and a faster time to reach σ = 0. Additionally, the larger This figure also shows a decrease across all emission ener-
radiative losses associated with a larger B cause more rapid gies, which is caused by the lower final radius. Table 1 shows
blob shrinking, restricting the net growth of the emitting that whilst the final radius is comparable to that of the orig-
plasmoid. The location of the optically thin to thick bound- inal fit, it is achieved in a longer timescale, which is a direct
ary depends on the opacity, k ∝ j νν− 25 , and path length consequence of larger f increasing τ merge. Eqn. 5 shows that
ν
R. Since the emissivity j ν increases with B2, the smaller ra- β p decreases as R increases. Eqn. 6 shows that a small f in-
dius for larger magnetic fields is not enough to offset the creases the rate of radial growth, thus f influences v and
blob
increased k ν, thus the emitting blob becomes optically thick δ p. These effects will be discussed further in Section 3.6.
at higher frequencies. • Escape Time, τ esc : Although the escape time was not
The relative contributions of B g and B rec to the total mag- a free parameter and was set to τ esc = ∞ we investigated the
netic field B serve govern the late stage evolution of radiative effect of it on the resultant SEDs. To do this, we assumed
emission from the plasmoids. Once the energy available for τ esc was some factor multiplied by τ merge, indicated in Figs
particle acceleration initially stored in B has been trans- 5i-j. Fig. 5i shows that significant particle escape occurs for
rec
ferred to the electrons, particle acceleration no longer occurs τ esc = 10τ merge, which significantly reduces the high energy
and it is assumed that the plasmoid is no longer residing SSC emission. We find that if τ esc < τ merge the amount of
within the reconnection layer. In this event, the plasmoid particle escape is so severe that no acceleration occurs. Fig.
radiates with a constant magnetic field equal to B g, and the 5j shows that for the case of τ esc (cid:39) 50 τ merge there is very
electron population evolves such that higher energy electrons little change to the τ esc = ∞ best fit.
which have shorter radiative lifetimes radiate their energy • Jet Bulk Lorentz Factor, Γ : The parameters Γ , θ
j j obs
(cid:48)
more quickly than electrons at lower energies. The effect and θ serve to influence δ p, defined in Eqn. 26. They there-
which the relative contribution of the guide field to the total fore all affect the resultant SED similarly, thus we only show
magnetic field has on the light curve is shown in Fig. 8. the effect of Γ j. Changes in δ p consequently shift νF ν by
(δ(cid:48)/δ)4+k δ(cid:48)/δ, δ(cid:48)
• Initial Magnetisation, σ : Figs 5c and 5d show a and the emitted photon energies by where
0
higher maximum emitted energy in the synchrotron and SSC is the new Doppler factor.
peaks for a lower σ . Whilst at first this may seem counter-
0
intuitive, a lower magnetisation provides a reduced energy
budget for particle acceleration, and this supply of energy
3.3 Fitting to the 2016 TeV Flare of BL Lacertae
is depleted more quickly, causing a more rapid reduction of
the magnetic field than would be the case for higher σ . As Magnetic reconnection has been postulated to account for
0
P ∝ E2B2, the balance between radiative losses and par- the rapid variability associated at VHE frequencies. To as-
sync
ticle acceleration now occurs at higher electron energies for sess the feasibility of reconnection as a mechanism which
lower σ . Table 1 shows Fig. 5c has a smaller R and faster could power these flares, we applied our model to the 2016
0 f
t relative to Fig. 5d, which is a consequence of a smaller TeV flare of BL Lacerate (Abeysekara et al. 2018). We simul-
f
total energy supply which is more rapidly exhausted. Thus taneously fitted the SED and TeV light curve, which can be
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

10 P. J. Morris et al.
(a) Best fit SED to the 2016 TeV flare of BL Lacertae. Synchrotron emission is indicated by the red
solid line, and SSC by the dashed magenta line. Darker shades symbolise the radiative emission from
later times. The flaring SED is that from (Abeysekara et al. 2018). The quiescent SED (Abdo et al.
2011) is also shown by faint cyan dots for reference. We find that our reconnecting plasmoid model is
not able to produce sufficient SSC emission to fit well to both low and high energy data.
(b) Corresponding best fit to the VERITAS light curve of the (c) Figure showing the transfer of magnetic energy into particle
2016 BL Lacerate TeV flare (Abeysekara et al. 2018). The fit and radiation energy for the above SED. It can be seen that the
has χ2 = 1.95, and is consistent with the SED in panel (a). It total energy density remains constant in the model, and that the
ν
can be seen our model is able to reproduce the slow rise and radiation energy density U never exceeds U , which is why the
rad B
rapid decline well. After t ≈ 145 min, the energy stored in the SEDs are synchrotron dominated. The grey region represents the
reconnecting field has been entirely transferred to particles and rest frame time coincident with the flare shown in Fig. 6b. For
the light curve evolves with B = B . t (cid:39) 900 min, B has been completely depleted and the value
g rec
of U is the magnetic energy density stored in B . In this time
B g
period, U declines slightly as the plasmoid radius contracts as
rad
it emits radiatively.
Figure 6. Simultaneous figs for the TeV light curve of BL Lacerate, the corresponding SED, and the tracking of the various energy
densities in the system. The radial growth of the emitting plasmoid for this simulation proceeded approximately linearly, with any
shrinking effects due to radiative losses negligible before t ∼ 900 min when the reconnecting field has been depleted and the plasmoid no
longer grows from merging as it is assumed to have left the reconnection layer. The plasmoid radial growth was approximately linear in
time, as in Case A from Fig. 4.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

Reconnection Powered Blazar Flares from SSC 11
Table 2. Table listing best fit parameters for Fig. 6 and Fig. 7.
The parameters for Fig. 6 correspond to a total energy density of
U = 10−4 J m−3. The corresponding mean observed plasmoid
TOT
Lorentz factor is Γ = 37, with the mean Doppler factor δ = 73.
p p
Parameter Fig. 6 Fig. 7
B (T) 5×10−5 5×10−5
0
B (T) 4.5×10−6 1×10−6
g
σ 9×104 9×105
0
α 2.0 2.0
f 1.6 1.6
Γ 28 28
j
θ(cid:48) 87◦ 87◦
θ 1.2◦ 1.2◦
obs
seen in Fig. 6. The free parameters of the best fit are given in
Table 2. To obtain best fits to the data, we then selected the
SEDs from our parameter search (10,000 runs) with SED fits
closest to the BL Lacertae SED of (Abeysekara et al. 2018) Figure 7. Typical flare profile for a magnetically dominated
regime. It can be seen that the characteristic decay time of the
and refined the fit by eye. Since the SED fit is relatively poor
flare is comparable to the rise time. The initial parameters are
a χ2 minimisation is not very easy to apply given the lack
ν
given in Table 2. It can be seen that changes in σ and B are the
0 g
of simultaneous data at different wavelengths.
only difference in parameters between this flare and the best fit
When converting our luminosity values into observed
flare in Fig. 6, yet they have very different profiles. It should be
fluxes, we adopt a redshift for BL Lacertae of z = 0.0686
noted unlike for Fig. 6 that the free parameters for Fig. 7 have not
(Vermeulen et al. 1995), corresponding to a co-moving dis- been optimised in any way, and are included to provide an exam-
tance of 289 Mpc assuming a flat ΛCDM Universe with ple of a flare originating from a magnetically dominated emitting
H = 70 kms−1 Mpc−1 (e.g. Bennett et al. 2013). plasmoid.
0
Fig. 6c indicates that the reconnection plasmoid re-
quired to fit this particular TeV flare is particle dominated
model we would have to inject U or U , which would not
with σ < 1 during the time the majority of the TeV pho- B e
conserve energy.
tons are emitted. We note that although the best fit to the
2016 TeV flare required a particle dominated plasmoid, flar-
ing in our model does not uniquely occur when reconnecting
3.4 Synchrotron Dominated SEDs
plasmoids are in this regime. Flaring profiles corresponding
to different dominant energy densities in the emitting plas- It is clear from Fig. 6a that the best fit SED to the BL
moids are discussed in Section 3.5. Fig. 6c shows that U Lacertae 2016 flare is synchrotron dominated, with the X-
e
for this plasmoid increases by over a factor of 100, which is ray synchrotron peak νF value 10 times greater than the
ν
necessary for the plasmoid to contain electrons which have SSC peak. This synchrotron-dominance was a general prop-
undergone the substantial particle acceleration required for erty of all SEDs produced in our simulations, and our
them to produce SSC emission at TeV energies. The plas- model is unable to produce reconnection plasmoids with
moid reaches equipartition at around t = 450 min, after Compton-dominated SSC emission. Whilst no simultaneous
which it becomes particle dominated as B continues to synchrotron data was recorded during the 2 hour TeV flare
rec
be depleted as particles are accelerated. As expected, when and therefore the synchrotron emission is unconstrained, our
in equipartition, we find that the bolometric rest frame lu- model predicts X-ray emission 3 orders of magnitude higher
minosity of the plasmoid is highest because the energy is than that observed the day after the flare. This is over 10
evenly distributed between particles and magnetic fields. times higher than typical X-ray emission observed from BL
Beyond this, the bolometric luminosity decreases but the Lacertae (Giommi et al. 2002), thus it is likely that the
Compton-dominance of the SED increases as the reconnect- model over-predicts synchrotron emission relative to obser-
ing magnetic field weakens, reducing the radiative losses vations. This is consistent with the model of Nalewajko et al.
and increasing the maximum electron energy available for (2011), which found that their radiative mini-jet model also
inverse-Compton scattering. We therefore find that SEDs over-predicted X-ray emission.
are more strongly synchrotron dominated when σ > 1. We The model presented here converts magnetic energy into
have also investigated the effect of having reconnecting plas- particle energy by accelerating the electron population re-
moids that remain in equipartition after the initial particle siding in the reconnecting plasmoid at the expense of the
acceleration. However, we find that the conditions in the energy in the magnetic field. The constituent electrons in
plasmoid required to best account for extreme transient TeV the plasmoid then radiate via synchrotron and SSC. To ob-
emission mean that either the reconnecting magnetic field is tain a Compton dominated SED, from Eqns 14 and 16, we
declining and reducing U , or that the electrons are strongly require U > U . Fig. 6c shows that this was not the case
B rad B
radiating, which decreases U . Whichever of these two ef- for the best fit model, and this result was true in all of our
e
fects is dominant, the emitting plasmoid quickly moves out calculations. For each set of free parameters, whilst σ > 1,
of equipartition. Therefore, to maintain equipartition in our U > U ≥ U , thus the peak radiative losses from syn-
B e rad
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

12 P. J. Morris et al.
chrotron necessarily exceed that from SSC. Fig. 6c demon-
strates that it is possible for U > U , but the decline in
e B
U leads to a fall in the strength of the magnetic field,
B
B. As the magnetisation of the reconnecting plasmoid ap-
proaches zero, where it is completely particle dominated, the
magnetic field decreases rapidly and substantially, as indi-
cated in Fig. 6c after 800 minutes. This depletes the photon
field provided from the synchrotron emission, and therefore
U also suffers the same rate of decline as U , and thus
rad B
can never exceed it so that our SEDs can never be Comp-
ton dominated. Furthermore, assuming no external photons
are present, if U /U > 1 then from Eqns. 14 and 16, the
rad B
SSC losses are necessarily higher than those caused by syn-
chrotron emission. Here, the majority of synchrotron seed
photons, even those at low energies, become up-scattered to
X-rays or γ-rays. The corresponding energy losses are there-
fore significant (P ∝ E2), thus the underlying electron pop-
ulation quickly loses energy and reverts to a lower energy
Figure 8. Figure displaying the effects of varying the relative
configuration. In our model, these extreme losses would fur-
strength of the magnetic guide field on the best fit light curve.
ther cause the emitting plasmoid to shrink, decreasing the
The total initial magnetic field, B = B +B , is constant for each
chances of it becoming large enough to be observable. rec g
simulation, with the relative strength of the guide field adjusted.
Between 600-800 minutes, Fig. 6c shows that U de-
rad As energy is transferred from the reconnecting field to particles,
clines less rapidly than U . This is a consequence of the
B B is depleted so the total field strength approaches that of the
rec
radial growth of the emitting plasmoid. Larger plasmoids
guide field. When B dominates, the decay of the flare is governed
g
contain more radiating electrons and so have larger U rad, by the shortest radiative lifetime, which is shorter for stronger
and to some extent this can compensate for the decline in guide fields. Of these, the fit with B = 0.1B gives the best fit,
g rec
B. The synchrotron emissivity is proportional to the number with χ2 = 1.97.
ν
of emitting electrons and this is proportional to the volume
of the radiatively emitting plasmoid, i.e. j ∝ R3. In the cal-
ν
model in this paper is BL Lacertae. Although defines the
culation of the SSC emission, it is assumed that synchrotron
BL Lac blazar subclass of blazar, it does not always behave
seed photons are emitted into a spherical shell of thickness
dR = l , where l is one light second (Potter & Cotter 2012), as a BL Lac and has evidence for a broad line region (BLR)
c c
(Vermeulen et al. 1995). Free electrons in the BLR could
which is given in Eqn. 17. In Eqn. 17, N ∝ N , thus the total
γ e
potentially scatter external photons in the jet, providing ad-
radiation energy density provided by a fixed population of
ditional seed photons to be inverse-Compton scattered. An-
electrons producing synchrotron seed photons is given by,
other possibility is that other plasmoids, or emission from
the surrounding current layer (Giannios 2013) provide ad-
U ∝ N /V ∝ R3/R2 ∝ R. (27)
rad e shell ditional photons for EIC. The addition of EIC would likely
increase the Compton-dominance of emitting plasmoids in
Combining Eqn. 27 with Eqn. 16 yields,
our reconnection model, which in turn may make the con-
P ∝ U ∝ R. (28) tribution to the emission from smaller plasmoids important.
IC rad
Investigating these effects therefore represents a significant
Hence the maximum Compton dominance we can achieve
amount of work which was considered beyond the scope of
from our model is for large plasmoids approaching parti-
this paper, but is something we aim to explore in future
cle dominance. In PIC simulations, smaller plasmoids reach
work.
more relativistic speeds than larger ones (Sironi et al. 2016),
thus radiative emission from them is more strongly Doppler
boosted for an observer relative to larger plasmoids if both
3.5 Flaring Profiles
are beamed towards the observer. The above argument lead-
ing to Eqn. 28 regarding the ratio of SSC to synchrotron Fig. 6b illustrates our best fit to the 2016 TeV flare of BL
emission justifies choosing our own initial value of plasmoid Lacertae. The entire flare takes place over the course of ≈ 2
radius to be relatively large because a large radius is a re- hours, and our model is able to provide a reasonable fit to the
quirement to produce the amount of SSC γ-ray emission data with a χ2 = 1.95. The radiative emission from our re-
ν
observed. connecting plasmoid well replicates the slow rise and rapid
It is clear that adding in external photon fields and com- decline of the flare. This is important because it demon-
puting the contribution of external inverse-Compton (EIC) strates that a reconnecting plasmoid is able to produce pow-
radiation may help alleviate the issue that the plasmoid erful flares on short timescales.
emission is synchrotron dominated. In this work, we wished Fig. 6c shows that the entire light curve illustrated in
to establish initially whether the simplest possible case of Fig. 6b occurs in the phase where the emitting plasmoid be-
SSC emission alone could account for rapid TeV flaring in comes particle dominated with σ < 1. This can be used to
blazars, in much the same way as it can explain the SEDs explain the characteristic slow rise and rapid decay. During
observed from many BL Lac type blazars (e.g. Potter & the rise of the flare, the radius of the plasmoid is increas-
Cotter 2013b). The blazar flare fitted with our reconnection ing, thus increasing its synchrotron emissivity. From Eqn. 3,
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

Reconnection Powered Blazar Flares from SSC 13
behaviour, with the decline of the flare in this regime show-
ing an exponential decay dependent on the shortest radiative
lifetime, namely F ∼ exp(−t/τ (E,t)). This is because over
ν rad
time TeV emission from these plasmoids becomes progres-
sively dominated by lower energy electrons, until it ceases to
be emitted altogether when the maximum electron energy is
too low to produce TeV photons via SSC.
Whilst particle dominated flares typically have rapid
decay times, the model is also capable of producing flares
which are close to being symmetric, as indicated by Fig. 7.
In this scenario, the rise time of the flare is governed by
the merging timescale, which Eqn. 3 shows decreases with
increasing R. In this case, σ > 1 for the duration of the
emission period, thus there is little change on the value of
B and the radial growth has the most influence on the flare
profile. The increasing value of τ steadily reduces the
merge
acceleration efficiency, until a peak is reached which coin-
Figure 9. SED showing the effect of increasing the guide field to cides with where the electron radiative losses are balanced
be half of the total magnetic field, using the best fit parameters with the particle acceleration. After this point, as R keeps
for Fig. 6 which are listed in Table 2. Fainter lines indicate earlier increasing, the flare begins to decline. In the rest frame of
times in the time evolution of the SED. It can be seen that the
the emitting plasmoid, the rate of decline of the flare de-
synchrotron emission is slightly diminished relative to the best fit
creases as the peak frequency of the flare decreases and the
case from Fig. 6a (grey silhouette), but there is greater reduction
emitting electrons decrease in energy and have progressively
in the SSC emission. This is because as the guide field component
longer radiative lifetimes, with the emitted flux eventually
is larger than the best fit case, the total magnetic field strength
becoming negligible. This gives a slower decay time relative
remains relatively higher, causing higher radiative losses. The to-
to the rise time in the plasmoid rest frame. However, if the
tal magnetic energy is therefore more quickly depleted, giving a
smaller final blob size of 8×1013 m. From Eqn. 28, less SSC emis- plasmoid is accelerating as was the case in Fig. 7, the doppler
sion is produced. factor is higher at late times reducing the time interval. This
effect makes the flare look more symmetric to an observer. If
the emitting plasmoid has reached its peak velocity, a longer
the increase in R also increases the value of τ , making decline than rise may instead be observed. This result has
merge
the acceleration timescale longer. This affect alone would previously been found in the literature in radio data for ex-
cause the magnitude of the flare to increase less rapidly over tragalactic radio sources (Valtaoja et al. 1999; Guo et al.
time, however in the σ < 0 case an additional effect becomes 2016), though this has not before been explicitly predicted
more important. Fig.6a illustrates that SSC emission from by theory. Such a flare profile was typical of magnetically
later time SEDs have a higher maximum energy, because dominated plasmoids, and it should be noted that the pa-
of the decline in B shown throughout the emission time in rameters in Table 2 corresponding to Fig. 7 are included for
Fig. 6c. The maximum electron energy depends on a balance completeness only. We find that for flares at different peak
between radiative losses, which decrease with decreasing B, frequencies originating from both magnetically and particle
and the rate of particle acceleration, which decreases with dominated regions that the flaring profiles are qualitatively
increasing R. In this case, the decline in B is much more the same as for the TeV band, with the only difference be-
rapid than the growth of R, and so particle acceleration can ing that the characteristic rise and decay times reflect the
reach higher energies, causing the flare to rise. The rapid de- radiative lifetime of the emitting electrons.
cline is caused by the same property that prevents Compton-
dominant SEDs from this model. Namely, B rapidly falls as
3.6 Implications for PIC Simulations
σ approaches zero, quickly depleting the synchrotron seed
photons needed for SSC emission. In the VHE band plotted One difference between our model and PIC simulations is
in Fig. 6b, the radiative lifetime for the high energy electrons that the final power law on our electron population does
radiatively emitting in that band is very small, providing the not directly depend on σ. This is a direct consequence of
dramatic decline. there being no σ dependence in Eqn. 11 and is a limitation
The inclusion of a guide field effectively sets an upper of our model. Work undertaken by Ball et al. (2018) find
limit to the minimum magnetic field. This in turn limits the that the spectral index on the electron population is p ≈
√
minimum degree of magnetisation the reconnecting plasmoid 1.8+0.7/ σ. Our power law index is given in Eqn. 12 as p =
can have when it is assumed to leave the reconnection layer. 1+τ /(ατ ), and converges to ≈ 1 under our assumption
merge esc
One consequence of this is that once the magnetic energy that the emitting electrons were trapped in the reconnection
associated with B has been completely transferred to par- layer with τ = ∞. We chose this because it allowed for the
rec esc
ticles which are accelerated, the electron population evolves reduction in free parameters and simplified the model, and
in a magnetic field equal to the guide field. As B is constant, our main conclusions regarding the Compton dominance of
g
the radiative lifetimes of electrons at different energies are the SEDs have negligible dependence on this assumption.
now fixed. Eqns. 14 and 16 indicate that the highest energy One possibility to reconcile our electron population with
electrons radiate most quickly. Accordingly, the evolution of PIC results would be to change the value of τ to depend on
esc
the flare profile once B has been depleted depends on this the size of the reconnection layer, L. Taking τ ≈ L/c (Guo
rec esc
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

14 P. J. Morris et al.
the use of this formula to an environment for which it may
not be valid.
3.7 Can the Reconnection Layer Physically Exist
Within the Jet?
The final size of the emitting plasmoid in the reconnection
layer from our fit to the 2016 TeV flare of BL Lacertae was
R = 1.2×1014 m. Furthermore, the plasmoid travelled a dis-
f
tance L = 9.6 × 1014 m in the rest frame of the jet. These
are comparable to the typical radii used to model the quies-
cent emission from blazar jets in single zone emission models
(Ghisellini et al. 2002), which implies that the reconnecting
plasmoid needs to occupy a substantial fraction of the en-
tire jet. We consider the implications of this large size with
respect to location within the jet.
First, we consider whether the emitting plasmoid model
can explain the ≈ 2 hour TeV flare of BL Lacertae whilst
satisfying light travel time arguments. Throughout the emis-
sion of the 2016 TeV flare depicted in Fig. 6, the observed
Doppler factor was around δ ≈ 72, although this changed
p
slightly with the variation in v . Substitution of the final
blob
plasmoid radius and δ into Eqn. 1 constrains the permitted
p
variability timescale to t ≥ 100 min, thus our best fit is
var
not prohibited when considering the light crossing time.
Secondly, we constrain the location of the reconnection
Figure 10. Upper: The radial growth of the plasmoid required region in the blazar jet by assuming it to be in pressure
to fit to the TeV flare of BL Lacertae with free parameters given equilibrium with the surrounding plasma. To do this, we
in Table 2 had a radial growth profile which was approximately assume a jet which conserves total magnetic energy as it
linear. Lower: β b profile (Sironi et al. 2016) of the plasmoid uses expands radially, such that the radial dependence on the
to fit the SED and TeV light curve in Fig. 6. It can be seen that magnetic field of B ∝ R−1 (Potter & Cotter 2012). By
jet
the velocity initially increases, peaking at around 0.6c, before
assuming the jet to be in equipartition, an estimate of the
declining before the end of the simulation. When the magnetic
jet radius at the point of pressure equilibrium can be found.
energy in the reconnecting field has been completely depleted,
We take the power for the jet in BL Lacertae in the observers
it is assumed the emitting plasmoid leaves the reconnection layer
frame as P = 9.0×1036 W (Potter & Cotter 2013c). In such
and no longer merges. After this point, it is assumed to travel at a jet
a model, this power is contained in a conical section of the
constant velocity and its radius contracts slightly due to radiative
emission, and this occurs in the figure for t ≥ 1100 mins. jet of length one light second, l c, giving an observers frame
energy density of,
P
jet
U ≈ . (29)
et al. 2014) would likely mean that our electron spectral in- jet πR2 l
c
jet
dex converges to ≈ 1 as L needs to be large for astrophysical
objects. Another option could be that the efficiency of the We are interested in the frame in which the jet is at rest.
particle acceleration process, which we quantify with α, is The energy density of the jet in this frame, U(cid:48) is related to,
jet
not constant as assumed but depends on the magnetisation.
U by (e.g. Potter & Cotter 2012),
jet
Therefore, whilst we do not expect this to alter the main
conclusions of our work, we aim to investigate further in fu-
U
ture work what the impact of including σ in the acceleration U(cid:48) ≈ jet . (30)
jet Γ2
or escape terms would be.
j
Throughout this work, we have adopted the velocity
Table 2 gives the total energy density of the reconnection
profile of Sironi et al. (2016). Our success in fitting to the
plasmoid in its rest frame as U = 10−4 Jm−3. To compare
timescales of the TeV flare in Fig. 6 suggest that this profile TOT
to the jet energy density, we convert this to the jet frame
works very well, and is capable of producing powerful flares
as U(cid:48) ≈ Γ2U by analogy to Eqn. 30, where Γ ≈ 1.25
on short time-scales. The velocity of the best fit emitting TOT b TOT b
using v ≈ 0.6 c as the approximate peak velocity from the
plasmoid as it travels in the reconnection layer is shown in b
lower panel in Fig. reffig:RLvel. Combining Eqns. 29 and 30
Fig. 10. The figure shows that this particular plasmoid only
and assuming pressure equilibrium such that U(cid:48) = U(cid:48)
ever achieved mildly relativistic speeds of β ≈ 0.6 c, and jet TOT
allows us to solve for the jet radius as,
after some rapid initial acceleration reached a peak velocity
before slowing slightly beyond t ≥ 700 mins. This may occur (cid:118)(cid:116)
P
because we are in a much higher σ regime than for which R(cid:48) = jet , (31)
jet Γ2πl cU(cid:48)
Eqn. 4 was derived (see Sironi et al. 2016) and extrapolate
j TOT
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

Reconnection Powered Blazar Flares from SSC 15
yielding R(cid:48) ≈ 3 × 1014 m as the radius of the jet at the lo- scattering of external photons which may help to alleviate
jet
cation of the plasmoid in the plasmoid rest frame. This is the problems of overproduction of synchrotron emission and
only a factor ≈ 2 larger than the radius, and smaller than the problematically large size of observable plasmoids.
estimated length of the reconnection layer of L = 9.6×1014 m
calculated using Eqn. 7. This estimated jet radius is likely
to be problematic when considering the distance the plas-
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
moid has to travel to grow large enough to be observable, it
seems implausible to us that an SSC emitting reconnecting We thank our anonymous referee for constructive comments
plasmoid can explain the BL Lacertae flare since the size of that have improved the manuscript. PJM acknowledges sup-
the reconnecting region and plasmoid are both comparable port from a Hintze Scholarship. WJP is supported by a Ju-
to the size of the entire jet radius. Therefore, this plasmoid nior Research Fellowship from University College, Univer-
is unlikely to physically reside in the jet. sity of Oxford. GC acknowledges support from STFC grants
One possible explanation for the required large plas- ST/N000919/1 and ST/M00757X/1 and from Exeter Col-
moid size comes from a limitation of our model where we lege, Oxford. This work was supported by the Oxford Hintze
have neglected emission from external Compton radiation. Centre for Astrophysical Surveys which is funded through
The inclusion of this may result in smaller plasmoids which generous support from the Hintze Family Charitable Foun-
are able to emit a larger proportion of high energy radia- dation.
tion than a similarly sized emitting plasmoid only radiat-
ing via SSC. Inclusion of this may be able to produce more
realistic reconnection plasmoids which are not synchrotron
REFERENCES
dominated and are small compared to the jet radius. This is
something we aim to investigate in future work. Abdo A. A., et al., 2011, ApJ, 730, 101
Abeysekara A. U., et al., 2018, ApJ, 856, 95
Aharonian F., et al., 2007, ApJ, 664, L71
Albert J., et al., 2007, ApJ, 669, 862
4 SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Aleksi´c J., et al., 2014, Science, 346, 1080
Ball D., Sironi L., O¨zel F., 2018, ApJ, 862, 80
We have presented a macroscopic emission model which
Bell A. R., 1978, MNRAS, 182, 147
tracks the growth and velocity of a radiating plasmoid as
Bell A. R., Araudo A. T., Matthews J. H., Blundell K. M., 2018,
it travels through a reconnection layer in a blazar jet to as-
MNRAS, 473, 2364
sess the feasibility of magnetic reconnection powering blazar
Bennett C. L., et al., 2013, ApJS, 208, 20
flares. Our leptonic model accounts for particle accelera-
Blandford R., Eichler D., 1987, Phys. Rep., 154, 1
tion within the reconnection layer and computes the ra- Blandford R. D., K¨onigl A., 1979, ApJ, 232, 34
diative emission from the reconnecting plasmoid, including Bloom S. D., Marscher A. P., 1996, ApJ, 461, 657
synchrotron and synchrotron self-Compton emission. As an Blumenthal G. R., Gould R. J., 1970, Reviews of Modern Physics,
example we simultaneously fit the SED and TeV light curve 42, 237
B¨ottcher M., Chiang J., 2002, ApJ, 581, 127
for the 2016 TeV flare of BL Lacerate. The main conclusions
B¨ottcher M., Reimer A., Sweeney K., Prakash A., 2013, ApJ, 768,
of this work may be summarised as:
54
• Our reconnection model produces synchrotron- Chiaberge M., Ghisellini G., 1999, MNRAS, 306, 551
dominated flares, and cannot produce Compton-dominated Dar A., Laor A., 1997, ApJ, 478, L5
Galtier S., 2016, Introduction to Modern Magnetohydrodynamics
flares. This means that the plasmoid model is not able to
Ghisellini G., Maraschi L., Treves A., 1985, A&A, 146, 204
fit the 2016 TeV flare of BL Lacertae because synchrotron
Ghisellini G., Celotti A., Costamante L., 2002, A&A, 386, 833
emission is overproduced relative to SSC gamma-rays.
Giannios D., 2013, MNRAS, 431, 355
• Reconnecting plasmoids are able to produce powerful,
Giannios D., Uzdensky D. A., Begelman M. C., 2009, MNRAS,
rapid TeV flares. The model is able to fit well to the ob-
395, L29
served TeV light curve of the 2016 flare, the first time a
Giommi P., Capalbi M., Fiocchi M., Memola E., Perri M., Pi-
reconnection emission model has been able to fit to a TeV ranomonte S., Rebecchi S., Massaro E., 2002, in Giommi
blazar time series. P., Massaro E., Palumbo G., eds, Blazar Astrophysics with
• From an extensive parameter search we find that recon- BeppoSAX and Other Observatories. p. 63 (arXiv:astro-
necting plasmoids can produce a variety of lightcurve shapes ph/0209596)
Gould R. J., Schr´eder G., 1966, Physical Review Letters, 16, 252
(fast rise slow-decay, symmetric and slow rise fast-decay) de-
Gould R. J., Schr´eder G. P., 1967, Physical Review, 155, 1404
pending primarily on the magnetisation of the plasma and
Guo F., Li H., Daughton W., Liu Y.-H., 2014, Physical Review
the merge timescale of plasmoids.
Letters, 113, 155005
• The final size of emitting plasmoids which are luminous
Guo Y. C., Hu S. M., Li Y. T., Chen X., 2016, MNRAS, 460,
enough to be detected is problematically large, they are com-
1790
parable to the estimated jet radius. This is similar to radii
Hada K., et al., 2018, ApJ, 860, 141
used to model quiescent jet emission in one-zone jet models
Isliker H., Pisokas T., Vlahos L., Anastasiadis A., 2017, ApJ, 849,
and calls into question the physical viability of reconnection 35
powering such a flare if the emission mechanism is SSC. Kagan D., Sironi L., Cerutti B., Giannios D., 2015, Space Sci.
Rev., 191, 545
In this work we have only considered synchroton and
Kirk J. G., Rieger F. M., Mastichiadis A., 1998, A&A, 333, 452
SSC emission from the reconnecting plasmoid. In the future Konigl A., 1981, ApJ, 243, 700
we will investigate the effect of including inverse-Compton Levinson A., 2007, ApJ, 671, L29
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)

16 P. J. Morris et al.
Li H., Kusunose M., 2000, ApJ, 536, 729
Longair M. S., 2011, High Energy Astrophysics
Loureiro N. F., Schekochihin A. A., Cowley S. C., 2007, Physics
of Plasmas, 14, 100703
Mannheim K., 1993, A&A, 269, 67
Marscher A. P., 1980, ApJ, 235, 386
Mastichiadis A., Kirk J. G., 1997, A&A, 320, 19
Nakamura M., Asada K., 2013, ApJ, 775, 118
Nalewajko K., Giannios D., Begelman M. C., Uzdensky D. A.,
Sikora M., 2011, MNRAS, 413, 333
Parker E. N., 1957, J. Geophys. Res., 62, 509
Petropoulou M., Giannios D., Sironi L., 2016, MNRAS, 462, 3325
Potter W. J., Cotter G., 2012, MNRAS, 423, 756
Potter W. J., Cotter G., 2013a, MNRAS, 429, 1189
Potter W. J., Cotter G., 2013b, MNRAS, 431, 1840
Potter W. J., Cotter G., 2013c, MNRAS, 436, 304
Schopper R., Thorsten Birk G., Lesch H., 2002, Astroparticle
Physics, 17, 347
Sironi L., Spitkovsky A., 2014, ApJ, 783, L21
Sironi L., Petropoulou M., Giannios D., 2015, MNRAS, 450, 183
Sironi L., Giannios D., Petropoulou M., 2016, MNRAS, 462, 48
Spada M., Ghisellini G., Lazzati D., Celotti A., 2001, MNRAS,
325, 1559
Spitzer Jr. L., 1960, Physics of Fluids, 3, 659
Sweet P. A., 1958, in Lehnert B., ed., IAU Symposium Vol. 6,
Electromagnetic Phenomena in Cosmical Physics. p. 123
Tsang O., Kirk J. G., 2007, A&A, 476, 1151
Urry C. M., Padovani P., 1995, PASP, 107, 803
Uzdensky D. A., Loureiro N. F., Schekochihin A. A., 2010, Phys.
Rev. Lett., 105, 235002
Valtaoja E., L¨ahteenm¨aki A., Ter¨asranta H., Lainela M., 1999,
ApJS, 120, 95
Vermeulen R. C., Ogle P. M., Tran H. D., Browne I. W. A., Cohen
M. H., Readhead A. C. S., Taylor G. B., Goodrich R. W.,
1995, ApJ, 452, L5
Zdziarski A. A., B¨ottcher M., 2015, MNRAS, 450, L21
de Gouveia Dal Pino E. M., Kowal G., 2015, in Lazarian A.,
de Gouveia Dal Pino E. M., Melioli C., eds, Astrophysics and
SpaceScienceLibraryVol.407,MagneticFieldsinDiffuseMe-
dia. p. 373 (arXiv:1302.4374), doi:10.1007/978-3-662-44625-
6 13
de Gouveia dal Pino E. M., Lazarian A., 2005, A&A, 441, 845
del Valle M. V., de Gouveia Dal Pino E. M., Kowal G., 2016,
MNRAS, 463, 4331
This paper has been typeset from a TEX/LATEX file prepared by
the author.
MNRAS 000, 1–16 (2018)