Belief and Perceptions About Chemistry Teaching and Learning               BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(2)” 
 
ORCID of the Journal: https://orcid.org/0009-0000-0723-9485  
DOI Number of the Paper: https://zenodo.org/records/12512215 
Edition Link: Journal of Academic Research for Humanities JARH, 4(3) Jul-Sep 2024 
Link of the Paper: https://jar.bwo-researches.com/index.php/jarh/article/view/422 
HJRS Link: Journal of Academic Research for Humanities JARH (HEC-Recognized for 2023-2024) 
 
 
BELIEF AND PERCEPTIONS ABOUT CHEMISTRY TEACHING AND LEARNING: STUDY OF 
PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN MUZAFFARABAD AZAD KASHMIR 
 
Corresponding  DR ADEEL AHMED KHAN, Assistant Professor, University of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Muzaffarabad 
& Author 1:  Azad Kashmir, Email: khanadeel.raja@gmail.com 
Co-Author 2:  DR BATOOL ATTA, Assistant Professor, University of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Muzaffarabad Azad 
Kashmir, Email: batoolatta@gmail.com  
Co-Author 3:  QURATUL-AIN-ABBASI, M Phil Scholar, University of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Muzaffarabad Azad 
Kashmir, Email: syedrazzi46@gmail.com 
___________________________________________________________________________________________________ 
Paper Information          Abstract 
Citation of the paper:   QR Code for the Paper:    Chemistry  is  taught  as  an  essential  discipline  at  the 
(JARH) Abbasi, Q. A., Atta, B., & Khan,  secondary level to create a scientific attitude in students 
A.A.,  (2024).  Belief  and  Perceptions  towards science education. The primary purpose was to 
About  Chemistry  Teaching  and  explore the factors that contribute to students' high/low 
Learning: Study of Public Schools in  achievement in chemistry, in general to both boys and girls 
Muzaffarabad  Azad  Kashmir.  In  at the secondary level in public schools of Muzaffarabad 
Journal  of  Academic  Research  for  Azad Jammu and Kashmir. The present study also found out 
 
Humanities, 4(3), 25–35.   the effect of factors associated with students’ high and low 
Subject Areas for JARH:  achievement. The factors were divided into  three major 
1 Social Sciences  categories, teacher-related factors, student-related factors, 
2 Education   and  school-related  factors,  respectively.  A  quantitative 
research  method  was  used  to  conduct  this  study  and  a 
Timeline of the Paper at JARH: 
descriptive  survey  research  design  was  employed.  The 
Received on: 03-04-2024. 
study was conducted in 17 public schools of the Municipal 
Reviews Completed on: 14-06-2024. 
Corporation area of Muzaffarabad. 8 out of 17 schools were 
Accepted on: 14-06-2024.  
boys,’ and 9 were Girls high schools. The population of the 
Online on: 23-06-2024. 
study was all secondary school students currently in 10th 
License: 
grade. To gather the necessary data, a questionnaire was 
used to collect data from students to determine the causes 
 
of  students'  high/low  achievement  in  chemistry.  The 
Creative  Commons  Attribution-Share  Alike  4.0 
present study found that students’ interest in chemistry, 
International License 
motivation,  teachers’  attendance,  teachers’  pedagogical 
strategies, use of modern instructional resources, school 
Recognized for BWO-R: 
environment,  students’  previous  knowledge,  students’ 
involvement in-class activities, and laboratory adequacy are 
significantly related to student’s achievement. The study 
 
also revealed that the students could not learn and perform 
Published by BWO Researches INTL.: 
significantly well due to certain constraints like teachers' 
frequent  absence  in  some  schools,  lack  of  resources, 
laboratory inadequacy, and weak scientific foundation.  
Keywords:  Chemistry,  Achievement,  Motivation, 
   
DOI Image of the paper:  Administration, Performance 
   
 
25
 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| Corresponding   | DR ADEEL AHMED KHAN, Assistant Professor, University of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Muzaffarabad   |
| & Author 1:     | Azad Kashmir, Email: khanadeel.raja@gmail.com                                                 |
|:----------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Co-Author 2:    | DR BATOOL ATTA, Assistant Professor, University of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Muzaffarabad Azad   |
|                 | Kashmir, Email: batoolatta@gmail.com                                                          |
| Co-Author 3:    | QURATUL-AIN-ABBASI, M Phil Scholar, University of Azad Jammu and Kashmir Muzaffarabad Azad    |
|                 | Kashmir, Email: syedrazzi46@gmail.com                                                         |

Belief and Perceptions About Chemistry Teaching and Learning           BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(2)” 
Introduction  neglected  in  this  part  of  the  world  and  it  is 
Chemistry is regarded as one of the most  important. So, this study is going to fill this gap 
important disciplines in the secondary school  in the literature and in this way, this research 
curriculum and its importance in education has  study  will  contribute  to  the  entire  body  of 
worldwide recognition. The study of Chemistry  existing  knowledge.  The  significance  of  this 
is essential in all aspects of life. It is among the  study  is  to  find  out  the  contributing  factors 
critical  subjects  used  for  selective  involved in students’ subsequent achievement 
advancement  in  the  education  system.  This  in chemistry.  (Sarwar, Khurram, 2023), There 
study is about the factors that affect students'  has  been  a  lack  of  systematic  and  in-depth 
chemistry achievement at the secondary level.  investigation  into  the  situations  and  factors 
Among the factors that have been identified,  that  influence  the  teaching  and  learning  of 
that  affect  students’  chemistry  achievement  chemistry in high schools in Azad Kashmir. It 
are teaching strategies, teachers’ professional  would  be  helpful  to  identify  the  problematic 
skills, students’ interest, motivation, attitude,  areas in teaching and learning chemistry at the 
involvement  in  class,  laboratory  adequacy,  secondary level, especially in public schools of 
school  environment,  school  location,  and  Muzaffarabad. 
principals’  concern  regarding  students’  Definition of Major Variables and Terms 
chemistry learning. (Zareen, Imran et. al, 2023),  In this study, the following terms were used, 
It is based on this, that, the study constructed  their meaning is explained below: 
on the achievement of students in chemistry at  Chemistry 
the secondary level in public schools in terms of  It is the branch of science that deals with the 
student-related  variables,  (students’  interest,  study  of  matter,  changes  in  matter,  and  the 
motivation,  prior  knowledge,  attitude,  laws or principles that govern the changes. 
involvement  in  class,  weak  vocabulary)  Chemistry Achievement 
teacher-related variables (teaching strategies,  It refers to the competency level attained in 
use  of  instructional  materials,  teachers’  chemistry  knowledge,  skills,  and  concepts 
professional  skills,  experience,  teachers’  measured  in  terms  of  grades,  that  a  student 
attendance, effectiveness) and school-related  scores  in  chemistry  in  the  annual  board 
variables (school environment, school location,  examination. 
laboratory  adequacy,  Principals’  feedback)  Student-Related Factors  
respectively. This shows that there is a research  It refers to the factors that are related to 
gap even in identifying the factors associated  students’ self and have a significant influence 
with  students’  high/low  achievement  in  on  students’  chemistry  achievement.  It 
chemistry.  The  study  therefore  sought  to  includes students’ interests, motivation, prior 
investigate  the  influence  of  the  factors  on  knowledge, attitude, involvement in class, and 
students’  high/low  chemistry  achievement.  vocabulary.  Student-related  factors  are  the 
There  are  so  many  other  factors,  associated  intervening variables that affect the students’ 
with  students’  chemistry  achievement  other  high/low  achievement  in  chemistry  at  the 
than those studied in literature, which are not  secondary  level.  These  include  students’ 
well-researched  in  Azad  Kashmir.  The  interest,  attitude,  students’  involvement  in 
researcher found it imperative to ascertain this  chemistry  class,  prior  science  knowledge, 
association  from  a  Pakistani  perspective,  motivation,  socio-economic  status,  and 
specifically  for  Azad  Kashmir  (Muzaffarabad).  students’  self-efficacy  toward  chemistry 
(Sindh, Singh, et. al. 2023), This shows that this  learning (Kashu, 2014; Adodo & Gbore 2012; 
is an important problem that has been studied  Kyalo, 2016; Ozdemir, 2003). 
in  different  parts  of  the  world  and  is  being   
26 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Belief and Perceptions About Chemistry Teaching and Learning           BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(2)” 
Teacher-Related Factors  previous knowledge, students’ involvement in-
It refers to the factors that are related to the  class  activities,  and  laboratory  adequacy  are 
teachers that assist in educating the students  significantly related to student’s achievement. 
and affect their chemistry achievement. These  It was found that these factors positively affect 
include teaching strategies, use of instructional  and  contribute  to  students’  achievement  in 
materials,  teachers’  professional  skills,  chemistry at the secondary level. 
experience,  teachers’  attendance,  and  Research Problem 
effectiveness.  Teacher-related  factors  include  The purpose of this study is to investigate 
the  factors  related  to  teachers’  professional  the contributing factors involved in students’ 
skills,  experience,  pedagogical  strategies,  subsequent  achievement  in  chemistry  at  the 
attendance, qualification, classroom practices,  secondary level in public schools. The factors 
and  effectiveness  (Nbina  &  Barineka,  2012;  are  categorized  as  student-related,  teacher-
Sadler  &  Loehr,  2004;  Abuseji,  2007;  Abudu,  related,  and  school-related.  These  factors 
2014; Adesoji & Bosun, 2018; Beyessa, 2014)  affect the students’ chemistry achievement at 
School-Related Factors  the  secondary  level  in  public  schools  of 
It refers to the physical resources, human  Muzaffarabad Azad Kashmir. 
resources,  and  learning  resources  used  by  a  Research Objectives 
school in the promotion of students’ academic  • To  investigate  the  effect  of  student-related 
achievement. It includes school environment,  factors  on  students’  chemistry  achievement 
school  location,  laboratory  adequacy,  and  and  how  these  factors  are  associated  with 
Principals’  feedback.  School-related  factors  students’ high or low achievement. 
include  school  environment,  school  location,  • To  find  out  the  effect  of  teacher-related 
laboratory adequacy, and proper feedback. The  factors  on  students’  chemistry  achievement 
abilities  of  learners  in  terms  of  how  they  and  how  these  factors  are  associated  with 
contribute  to  students’  achievement  in  students’ high or low achievement. 
chemistry include mathematical abilities, self- • To inquire about the effect of school-related 
learning  skills,  problem-solving  skills,  self- factors  on  students’  chemistry  achievement 
confidence,  and  practical  skills  (Akani,  2015;  and  how  these  factors  are  associated  with 
Hofstein,  2004; Badeleh,  2011;  Burak, 2009).  students’ high or low achievement. 
Data was collected from 17 public secondary  Significance of the Study:  
schools  in  the  municipal  corporation  area  of  This study will help the students, chemistry 
Muzaffarabad  Azad  Kashmir.  Seventeen  teachers,  principals,  curriculum  developers, 
secondary  schools  included  in  the  municipal  examination  board,  and  public-school 
corporation  area  of  Muzaffarabad  were  administration to improve students' chemistry 
selected,  eight  boys’  and  nine  girls’  schools.  achievement, chemistry teachers' effectiveness, 
Three  hundred  students  were  selected  as  a  and  administration,  the  decisions  regarding 
sample for the study. Data were collected from  chemistry  teachers'  recruitment,  curriculum, 
the selected schools through a questionnaire.  board examination, etc. This research will also 
An observation sheet was also used to confirm  be an opportunity for future researchers who 
the  collected  data  through  the  researcher’s  want  to  contribute  to  science  education  and 
observation during school visits. (Bridge, Horey,  chemistry teaching. 
et.  al.  2023),  The  present  study  found  that  Research Questions  
student’s  interest  in  chemistry,  motivation,  1. What is the effect of student-related factors 
teachers’  attendance,  teachers’  pedagogical  on students’ chemistry achievement and how 
strategies,  use  of  modern  instructional  these  factors  are  associated  with  students’ 
resources,  school  environment,  students’  high or low achievement? 
27 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Belief and Perceptions About Chemistry Teaching and Learning           BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(2)” 
2. What is the effect of teacher-related factors  scientific background. Their study revealed that 
on students’ chemistry achievement and how  chemistry teachers' attitudes significantly affect 
these  factors  are  associated  with  students’  students'  achievement  in  chemistry  at  the 
high or low achievement?  secondary  level.  Wenglinsky  (2001)  indicated 
3. What is the effect of school-related factors on  that the effect of classroom practices designed 
students’  chemistry  achievement  and  how  by the teachers directly contributes to students' 
these  factors  are  associated  with  students’  learning.  He  claimed  that  teachers  could 
high or low achievement?  contribute  as  much  to  students'  learning 
Delimitations of the Study:  through  effective  classroom  practices  as 
The present study is delimited to the public  students themselves. Abdullahi (2010) assessed 
schools  under  the  Municipal  Corporation  of  the  effects  of  teachers'  effectiveness  on 
Muzaffarabad  Azad  Kashmir.  Only  17  public  students'  achievement  in  mathematics.  His 
schools were targeted, nine girls' schools and  study  revealed  that  teacher  effectiveness 
eight boys' schools.  positively  affects  students'  academic 
Literature Review  achievement  in  mathematics.  He  suggested 
Teacher-Related Factors  that students' achievement can be enhanced by 
There  is  a  relationship  between  the  increasing  teacher  effectiveness  by  providing 
academic  achievement  of  chemistry  students  qualified and experienced teachers. 
and the use of instructional material in teaching  School-Related Factors 
and learning chemistry at the secondary level.  Adesoji  &  Olatunbosun  (2008)  established 
Instructional  materials  contribute  to  effective  that  school  environment  and  teacher-related 
teaching-learning of chemistry at the secondary  factors  influence  students'  achievement  in 
level.  The  students  taught  with  the  help  of  chemistry.  Their  study  revealed  that  school 
instructional  materials  perform  better  and  location,  school  environment,  laboratory 
higher than those taught without instructional  adequacy,  and  teachers'  attendance  at 
materials  (Adalikwu  &  Iorkpilgh,  2013).  Tai,  chemistry  workshops  directly  influence  the 
Sadler, & Loehr (2004) investigated the factors  students'  achievement  in  chemistry  at  the 
influencing  success  in  chemistry.  Their  study  secondary  level.  Oginni,  Awobodv,  Alaka,  & 
revealed  that  the  high  school  teachers'  Saibu  (2013)  examined  the  role  of  school 
pedagogical  strategies  are  linked  to  the  factors in students' achievement in chemistry. 
student's  performance  in  chemistry.  The  They found out that school location, laboratory 
teachers teaching science education should use  adequacy, and frequency of practical classes are 
a  collaborative  method  in  their  classes  and  the  factors  that  predict  students'  academic 
involve  students  in  their  lessons  since  it  achievement  in  chemistry  at  the  secondary 
enhances  students'  science  achievement.  The  level. Based on their study, Korir & Kipkemboi 
students who were taught by actively involved  (2014) established that school environment and 
in class achieved better than those taught with  peer  influence  significantly  affect  students' 
lecture-based  methods  (Nkechinyere  &  Ordu,  academic performance. They stated that school 
2018).  Abudu  (2014)  found  the  relationship  contributes to a child's academic performance. 
between  teachers'  attitudes  and  students'  The head teacher and the teachers either have 
academic  achievement  in  secondary  school  a  positive  or  negative  influence  on  students' 
chemistry. Certain factors are associated with  academic  achievement.  According  to 
the student's low achievement in chemistry at  Edomwonylotu & Avaa (2011), certain factors 
the secondary level. These are the method of  influence  students'  positive  achievement  in 
instructional  material,  the  teacher's  attitude,  chemistry.  These  factors  include  school 
laboratory  inadequacy,  and  students'  poor  environmental  factors  like  time,  attitude, 
28 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Belief and Perceptions About Chemistry Teaching and Learning           BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(2)” 
adequacy,  etc.  Improvement  in  these  achievement  has  a  positive  relationship  with 
environmental  factors  will  improve  the  their involvement in classroom activities by the 
student's  performance  in  chemistry.  Kyalo  teacher. The teacher-centered activities had a 
(2016) inquired about the school factors that  positive  impact  on  students'  science 
influence students' performance in chemistry.  achievement  on  TIMSS  tests  (Ozdemir  & 
His study revealed that fundamental concepts,  Ertugral,  2003).  Students'  chemistry 
preparation,  teaching  and  learning  methods,  achievement  has  a  positive  relationship  with 
students'  attitudes,  involvement,  and  their involvement in classroom activities by the 
assessment  methods  are  some  of  the  school  teacher. The teacher-cantered activities had a 
factors  influencing  students'  chemistry  positive  impact  on  students'  science 
performance. Akani (2015) inquired about the  achievement  on  TIMSS  tests  (Ozdemir  & 
role  of  the  laboratory  in  students'  academic  Ertugral, 2003). Adodo & Gbore (2011) studied 
achievement in chemistry in secondary schools.  the effects of students' attitudes and interests 
He  found  out  that  the  use  of  the  laboratory  on their academic performance in science. They 
contributes  to  developing  learners'  attitudes  suggested  that  a  suitable  teaching  method 
towards  learning  chemistry.  Involving  the  involving  students  boosts  students'  academic 
students  in  laboratory  activities  at  the  high  achievement,  interest,  and  attitude  toward 
school  level  enables  them  to  promote  their  science. According to them, students' interest in 
science  learning.  The  laboratory  activities  science  is  more  significant  in  enhancing  their 
enable  teaching  the  lesson  effectively  and  academic  performance  than  their  attitudes. 
enhance  students'  science  learning  (Hofstein,  They  demonstrated  that  students'  interest 
2004). Badeleh (2011) compared the traditional  motivates and enhance students' attention and 
method and the use of the laboratory method  memory  (Jegede,  2007).  Brown  et  al.  (2015) 
and their influence on  students' achievement  inquired  about  the  relationship  between 
and retention in chemistry. His study indicated  students'  attitudes  and  the  achievement  of 
that using the laboratory in teaching chemistry  undergraduate  students  in  chemistry.  They 
was  found  more  effective  than  teaching  found  out  that  the  student's  achievement  in 
chemistry  by  using  the  traditional  method  at  chemistry is independent of students' attitudes. 
the elementary level. Burak (2009) stated that  AKBAÞ  &  Kan  (2007)  investigated  the  factors 
laboratory  application  enhances  students'  that  influence  chemistry  achievement.  They 
science  progress,  develops  problem-solving  concluded  that  students'  motivation  and 
skills, and enhances their interest and attitude  anxiety  are  significant  predictors  of  their 
toward  science  education.  He  suggested  that  achievement in chemistry. Alordiah, Akpadaka, 
teachers use the laboratory while teaching to  &  Oviogbodu  (2015)  studied  the  influence  of 
improve students' performance in chemistry.  gender, school location, motivation, and socio-
Student-Related Factors  economic  status  on  students'  achievement  in 
Students  themselves  contributed  to  their  mathematics.  The  study  results  showed  that 
failure  in  chemistry.  Their  negative  attitudes,  these  factors  significantly  influence  students' 
lack  of  interest,  and  lack  of  confidence  are  academic performance in mathematics.  Cavas 
contributing  factors.  Students'  negative  (2011) studied  that  primary  students'  science 
attitudes  result  from  wide  syllabus  coverage,  motivation  significantly  differs  in  gender  and 
lack of exposure to a well-equipped laboratory,  grade level. Students' motivational level toward 
and  poor  teaching  methods.  The  students'  science  contributes  to  their  attitudes  and 
negative  attitude  affects  students'  academic  achievement in science. Seery (2009) inquired 
achievement  in  chemistry  at  the  secondary  about the role of students' prior knowledge and 
level  (Salome,  2013).  Students'  chemistry  students'  aptitude  in  their  chemistry 
29 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Belief and Perceptions About Chemistry Teaching and Learning           BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(2)” 
performance. He found that there is a strong  population  estimate  of  833  Students.  The 
correlation between students' prior knowledge  enrolment shows that there are 465 boys and 
and  their  exam  performance  in  chemistry.  368 girls  
Students'  prior  knowledge  is  the  most  Sample 
significant  factor  in  predicting  students'  A sample of 300 students was selected from 
performance  in  chemistry.  Prior  knowledge  17 public schools in Muzaffarabad, 169 male 
greatly influences students' exam performance  and 131 female students. A stratified random 
more than students' aptitude. This study was  sampling technique was used to select samples, 
intended to examine the factors that affect the  and  then  students  were  randomly  selected. 
students'  chemistry  achievement  at  the  The  sample  was  selected  from  the  list  of 
secondary level. The previous studies suggested  population through a sampling generating site 
that certain factors affect the performance of  (https://sample-size.net).  A  stratified  random 
secondary students in chemistry. The previous  sampling  technique  was  used  to  select  a 
studies  revealed  that  teachers'  attitudes,  sample,  and  then  students  were  randomly 
instructional  methods,  students'  attitudes,  selected, as it is an unbiased technique. All the 
students'  prior  knowledge,  and  some  school  members of the population have equal chances 
factors highly contribute to their achievement  to get selected. According to Creswell (2012), 
in  chemistry  and  the  factors  associated  with  in  stratified  sampling,  researchers  divide 
students' chemistry achievement.   (stratify)  the  population  on  some  specific 
Research Methodology  characteristics  (e.g.,  gender)  and  then,  using 
This study investigated the effect of factors  simple random sampling, a sample from each 
on  students’  achievement  and  how  those  subgroup  of  the  population  (e.g.,  males  and 
factors were associated with students’ high/low  females). The use of this procedure guarantees 
achievement. Data was collected from 17 public  that the sample includes specific characteristics 
secondary schools in the municipal corporation  that  the  researcher  needs  in  the  sample. 
area  of  Muzaffarabad  Azad  Kashmir.  A  Stratification ensures that the stratum desired 
quantitative  research  method  was  used  to  will be represented in the sample in proportion 
conduct the present study. The research design  to that existence in the population. 
used in this study is a descriptive survey. This  Table 1 
design  was  suitable  for  this  research  as  this  Sample size 
study focuses on the academic achievement of 
Boys'  Public   Girls  Public 
secondary students and the factors associated  Total Sample 
Schools  Schools 
with students’ high/low achievement in public 
300  169      131 
schools of Muzaffarabad. 
Population   Sample grid for students 
The area of the study was limited to public  Table 2 
secondary schools of the municipal corporation  School-wise details of students 
area of Muzaffarabad Azad Kashmir, in which 17    Total  Public Schools 
secondary  schools  were  included.  8  boys’  Male  Female 
   
Schools  Schools 
secondary schools and 9 girls’ high schools. All 
the  10th-grade  students  from  public  sector 
Schools  17  8  9 
schools  of  Muzaffarabad  Azad  Kashmir 
constituted  the  population  from  which  the 
Students  833  465  368 
sample was drawn. The total enrolled students 
were  833,  465  boys  and  368  girls.  The  study 
Sample for study            
169  131 
targeted  17  secondary  public  schools  with  a  300 
30 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

|                  | Total   | Public Schools   | None    |
|:-----------------|:--------|:-----------------|:--------|
|                  |         | Male             | Female  |
|                  |         | Schools          | Schools |
| Schools          | 17      | 8                | 9       |
| Students         | 833     | 465              | 368     |
| Sample for study |         | 169              | 131     |
| 300              |         |                  |         |

Belief and Perceptions About Chemistry Teaching and Learning           BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(2)” 
Variables  gave  the  same  responses  every  time  it  was 
The following were the main variables that  administered. The reliability of the items was 
were considered in the study  based on estimates of the variability among the 
Dependent Variables  items. To determine the coefficient of stability, 
Students' achievement in chemistry  Cronbach’s Alpha coefficient was applied to the 
Intervening Variables  data  to  check  the  reliability  of  the  research 
• Student-Related variables include:  instrument.  The  results  are  presented  in  the 
• Their  learning  attitudes,  lack  of  interest,  following tables. 
family background, self-learning skills, prior   Reliability  (Cronbach’s  Alpha  Coefficient)                                       
knowledge,  aptitude,  learning  styles,  (a) Case Processing Summary 
vocabulary issues, and time spent.           N       % 
• Teacher-related variables include: 
          Valid            100.0 
• Instructional  material,  pedagogical  skills, 
300 
regularity, attitude, teaching competencies, 
Cases                      0 
qualification,  satisfying  the  students, 
Excluded  0 
motivation 
           Total                100.0 
• School-related variables include: 
300 
• School  location,  environment,  laboratory 
(b)   Reliability Statistics  
adequacy, timetable, principal's visit, learner 
Cronbach’s Alpha    No.  of 
feedback policy. 
Items 
Research Instruments 
            0.88         25 
A  questionnaire  was  used  to  seek  out 
information  from  secondary  school  students 
Neuman  (2000)  indicated  that  a  reliability 
about the factors associated with their high/low 
coefficient of at least 0.7 of Cronbach’s Alpha is 
achievement  in  chemistry.  The  questionnaire 
considered enough for the research instrument 
constituted  25  items  based  on  a  five-point 
to be used. The results above showed that 0.88 
Likert scale. It consisted of two sections. Section 
validates that the tool used is reliable. In this 
I contained the demographical information of 
study,  face  validity  was  used  to  check  the 
students,  while  section  II  constituted  three 
suitability  of  items  to  their  objectives.  The 
parts. Part I consists of ten statements, part II 
above  aspect  of  validation  was  achieved  by 
has  ten  statements,  and  part  III  has  five 
subjecting  the  instrument  to  the  content 
statements,  respectively.  The  questionnaire 
expert  as  the  researcher’s  supervisor.  In  this 
was designed in two languages to develop ease 
research  study,  the  instrument  was  assessed 
in  understanding  the  statements.  The 
through  experts’  opinions  on  the  items. 
statements  in  the  questionnaire  were  simple 
Members  of  the  supervisory committee  took 
and  easy  to  understand.  The  purpose  of  the 
part in this process and suggested whether the 
observation sheet in this study was to verify the 
questionnaire measures what it is supposed to 
responses  from  the  students  administered 
measure.  
through a questionnaire.  
Data Analysis 
Reliability and Validity 
The students' filled questionnaires provided 
To test the reliability of the instrument to be 
data  that  was  examined  and  then  coded  for 
used  in  the  present  study,  the  test  re-test 
data  analysis.  The  responses  were  assigned 
method  was  used.  The  questionnaire  was 
codes  as  Strongly  Agree  (SA)  5;  Agree  (A)  4; 
administered  twice  among  twenty  students 
Undecided  (UD)  3;  Disagree  (D)  2;  Strongly 
from  four  schools  within  two  weeks.  This 
Disagree (SDA) 1. Statistical Package for Social 
indicated the extent to which the questionnaire 
Sciences (SPSS) was used for data analysis, as it 
31 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

|          |   N |   % |
|:---------|----:|----:|
| Valid    | 300 | 100 |
| Cases    |   0 |   0 |
| Excluded |     |     |
| Total    | 300 | 100 |

|   Cronbach’s Alpha |   No. of |
|                    |    Items |
|-------------------:|---------:|
|               0.88 |       25 |

Belief and Perceptions About Chemistry Teaching and Learning           BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(2)” 
enabled  the  handling  of  large  amounts  of  listed  factors  and  chemistry  achievement  of 
primary and secondary data efficiently and was  high/low achievers. The statistical significance 
also  timesaving.  The  analysis  was  done  using  of  the  results  was  examined  at  α=0.05 
the Chi-square technique. The Chi-square test  significance  level.  P  values  (<0.05)  of  these 
of association was used to test the hypothesis  statistics  depict  the  marks  obtained  in 
of an association between the two genders and  chemistry at the secondary level. This section 
other correlated factors.   analyses and presents the study's findings and 
Variables  Marks in  Pearson  Degree  P- discusses the results, respectively. Analysis of 
Chemistr chi- of  value 
the  collected  data  from  secondary  school 
y  square  freedom 
Value  students  revealed  that  the  students-related 
Df 
Obtained Marks  Below  24.18  4  .000  factors  (interest  in  chemistry,  students' 
in Chemistry and  33% = 
previous  science  knowledge,  involvement  in 
students’  23 
chemistry  lessons),  teacher-related  factors 
interest in 
chemistry  (teachers'  teaching  strategies  to  teach 
Marks obtained  33-44%  210.007  16  .000 
chemistry,  teachers'  attendance),  and  school-
in Chemistry and  = 35 
related  factors  (school  environment)  are 
students’ 
previous science  significantly  associated  with  students' 
knowledge 
achievement  in  secondary  school  chemistry. 
Achievement in  45-59%  108.570  16  .000 
The  P-value  is  0.000,  which  is  less  than  the 
chemistry and  = 83 
the teaching  significance  level,  which  is  0.005.  So,  it  is 
strategies used 
concluded that there is a relationship between 
by the teacher 
student-related  factors  (interest  in  chemistry, 
to teach 
chemistry  students'  previous  science  knowledge, 
Students’  60-79%  95.083  16  .000 
involvement  in  chemistry  lessons),  teacher-
chemistry  = 137 
related factors (teachers' teaching strategies to 
achievement 
and their  teach  chemistry,  teachers'  attendance),  and 
involvement in 
school-related  factors  (school  environment) 
chemistry 
and their marks in secondary school chemistry.
lessons 
Teachers’  80%  393.593  16  .000     Obtained  Marks  in  Chemistry  and 
attendance and  and 
students’ interest in chemistry 
students’  above = 
Level of significance:           α=0.05 
achievement in  22 
chemistry  Test statistic to be used: 
Students'  Total =  206.869  16  .000 
−eij)2
r=1j c=1(oe
chemistry  300  2=i
achievement  ij
and School 

 
environment. 
Results and Discussion  ij
Marks in chemistry      SDA             DA          UD           A           SA        TOTAL 
This  study  was  designed  to  examine  the 
Below 33%                       0                    9              0               5            9              23 
factors studied in the literature contributing to 
33-44%       26                  9              0                0           0              35 
students'  high/low  achievement  in  chemistry. 
45-59%                             0                    9              18             29         27             83 
Data  was  collected  through  a  questionnaire 
60-79%    0                    0              18             57         62             137 
from  secondary  school  students.  (Tong,  Yu, 
80% and above                 0                    0               0               8          14             22 
Deacon, et. al. 2024), An observation sheet was 
Total                                26                   27            36             99        112            300 
also used to confirm the collected data through 
 
the  researcher's  observation  during  school   
 
visits.  Pearson  chi-square  test  of  association 
 
was used to find out the association among the 
32 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| Variables        | Marks in   |   Pearson |    Degree |      P- |
|                  | Chemistr   |      chi- |        of |   value |
|                  | y          |    square |   freedom |         |
|                  |            |     Value |        Df |         |
|:-----------------|:-----------|----------:|----------:|--------:|
| Obtained Marks   | Below      |    24.18  |         4 |       0 |
| in Chemistry and | 33% =      |           |           |         |
| students’        | 23         |           |           |         |
| interest in      |            |           |           |         |
| chemistry        |            |           |           |         |
| Marks obtained   | 33-44%     |   210.007 |        16 |       0 |
| in Chemistry and | = 35       |           |           |         |
| students’        |            |           |           |         |
| previous science |            |           |           |         |
| knowledge        |            |           |           |         |
| Achievement in   | 45-59%     |   108.57  |        16 |       0 |
| chemistry and    | = 83       |           |           |         |
| the teaching     |            |           |           |         |
| strategies used  |            |           |           |         |
| by the teacher   |            |           |           |         |
| to teach         |            |           |           |         |
| chemistry        |            |           |           |         |
| Students’        | 60-79%     |    95.083 |        16 |       0 |
| chemistry        | = 137      |           |           |         |
| achievement      |            |           |           |         |
| and their        |            |           |           |         |
| involvement in   |            |           |           |         |
| chemistry        |            |           |           |         |
| lessons          |            |           |           |         |
| Teachers’        | 80%        |   393.593 |        16 |       0 |
| attendance and   | and        |           |           |         |
| students’        | above =    |           |           |         |
| achievement in   | 22         |           |           |         |
| chemistry        |            |           |           |         |
| Students'        | Total =    |   206.869 |        16 |       0 |
| chemistry        | 300        |           |           |         |
| achievement      |            |           |           |         |
| and School       |            |           |           |         |
| environment.     |            |           |           |         |

Belief and Perceptions About Chemistry Teaching and Learning           BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(2)” 
Chi-square Test   triangulate the results. (Van, Gotch, et. al. 2024), 
                                                  Value         Degree  The  study's  objectives  were  to  find  out  the 
of freedom        P value  factors  (that  were  explored  in  the  literature 
Pearson chi-square                       24.18            r  e  v   i e  w)  i.e.  student  student-related,  teacher-
4                      .000 
related,  and  school-related,  to  students' 
The value of Pearson chi-square is 24.184, 
chemistry  achievement  and  their  association 
and its probability value is 0.000 with 4 degrees 
with students' high/low achievement. The study 
of  freedom  which  is  less  than  the  level  of 
was  conducted  in  17  public  schools  in  the 
significance that is 0.05, it concludes that there 
Municipal Corporation area of Muzaffarabad. 8 
is a relationship between students’ interest in 
out of 17 schools were boys,' and 9 were Girls' 
chemistry and their marks in chemistry at the 
high  schools.  The  study  population  was  all 
secondary level.  
secondary  school  students  currently  in  10th 
Achievement in chemistry and the teaching 
grade. A sample of 300 students was selected 
strategies  used  by  the  teacher  to  teach 
out of 833 students. 169 out of 300 were boys, 
chemistry 
and 131 were girls. Several studies on students’ 
Level of significance:                α=0.005 
chemistry  achievement  and  the  factors 
Test statistic to be used: 
associated with high/low achievement revealed 
2
r c the effect of factors associated with students' 
( )

o −e
high and low achievement. (Batool, Faqir, et. al. 
ij ij
2 = i=1 j=1 2024),  The  data  produced  were  subject  to 
 
e
quantitative  analysis.  Pearson  chi-square  was 
ij
also calculated to determine factors related to 
MB3468T ar ks in chemistry   SD A         DA     UD         A          SA          TOTAL    
students' chemistry achievement. It was found 
elo w 33%                   0               9            0              10             4             23 
that  these  factors  positively  affect  and 
3-4 4%                         0               0           11              5             19            35 
contribute  to  students'  achievement  in 
5-5 9%                         9               0            9               52           13         83 
chemistry at the secondary level. 
0-7 9%                         9               2 0         18             61           29            137 
Findings 
0%  and above             0               0            0               22           0               22  
The present study found that students' interest 
ota l                             1 8            2 9         38             150         65             300 
is  an  important  factor  that  affects  students' 
Chi-square Test 
 
chemistry achievement. 
Value            Degree of freedom         P value 
•  The  present  study's  findings  reported  that 
Pearson  chi-square                          108.570                      
the teaching strategies adopted by the teacher 
16                            .000 
to teach chemistry affect students' chemistry 
The value of Pearson chi-square is 108.570, 
achievement.  
the degree of freedom is 16, and the p-value is 
• The  present  study  also  indicated  a  strong 
0.000 which is less than the level of significance, 
correlation  between  the  students' 
which  is  0.005.    It  presents  that  there  is  an 
involvement  in  chemistry  class  and  their 
association  between  the  teaching  strategies 
achievement in chemistry.  
used  for  chemistry  teaching  and  students’ 
• The  present  study  found  the  school 
chemistry achievement. 
environment  to  be  another  crucial 
Discussion 
contributing  factor  affecting  students' 
This  study  examined  a  Gender-based 
achievement in chemistry.  
comparison  of  students'  achievement  in 
• The  current  study  analyzed  that  laboratory 
chemistry  at  the  secondary  level  in  public 
adequacy is positively related to students' high 
schools of Muzaffarabad. Students' responses 
chemistry  scores.  The  time  spent  in  the 
regarding the factors were also perceived, and 
an  observation  sheet  was  also  used  to 
33 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

Belief and Perceptions About Chemistry Teaching and Learning           BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(2)” 
laboratory  during  lab  hours  contributes  to  AV aids and modern resources can enhance 
students' high chemistry achievement.   students' chemistry achievement and interest 
• The  present  study  also  revealed  that  the  in chemistry learning. 
student's  previous  science  knowledge  2. Most  public  schools  do  not  have  chemistry 
positively correlates with students' chemistry  labs,  and  if  there  are,  the  teachers  cannot 
achievement at the secondary level.  operate  and  handle  the  apparatus.  So  the 
•  The  present  study  revealed  that  teachers'  government  and  school  administrations 
attendance is an important factor in students'  should take steps to establish chemistry labs 
chemistry achievement.   in schools. 
• The present study also perceived that modern  3. The  government  should  take  steps  for  the 
resources  are  positively  associated  with  professional  development  of  teachers  and 
students'  chemistry  achievement.  Teachers  provide knowledge about the appropriate use 
who  use  modern  resources  and  AV  aids  to  of teaching methods rather than conventional 
teach chemistry lessons significantly enhance  methods.  The  school  environment  and  the 
their students' achievement.   resources  provided  should  have  a  proper 
monitoring  system  by  the  authorities  and 
• The  present  study  also  analysed  that 
government  officials  to  check  whether  the 
motivation  and  students'  chemistry 
resources are properly utilized.  
achievement  are  significantly  related. 
References 
Motivation is an essential factor that enhances 
Abdullahi,  O.  F.,  &  Onasaniya,  S.  A.  (2010).  Effect  of 
students' achievement in chemistry.  
teacher  effectiveness  on  Kwara  State  Secondary 
• The  present  study  found  that  student's 
School  students’  achievement  in 
interest  in  chemistry,  motivation,  teachers' 
Mathematics. Medwell  Journals.  Scientific  research 
attendance,  pedagogical  strategies,  use  of  publishing company, 5(4p286-292). 
modern  instructional  resources,  school  Abudu, K. A., & Gbadamosi, M. R. (2014). Relationship 
between  teacher’s  attitude  and  student’s  academic 
environment,  students'  previous  knowledge, 
achievement in senior secondary school chemistry. A 
students' involvement in in-class activities, and 
case  study  of  Ijebu-Ode  and  Odogbolu  Local 
laboratory  adequacy  are  significantly  related 
Government Area of Ogun state. Wudpecker Journal of 
to student's achievement.  Educational Research, 3(3), 035-043. 
Conclusion  Adalikwu, S. A., &Iorkpilgh, I. T. (2013).The Influence of 
Instructional Materials  on Academic Performance  of 
Based on findings and discussions, it can be 
Senior Secondary School Students in Chemistry in Cross 
concluded  that  some  factors  affect  students' 
River  State. Global  Journal  of  Educational 
achievement  in  chemistry  i.e.  better  school 
Research, 12(1), 39-46. 
environment,  students'  interest,  teachers'  Adesoji,  F.  A.,  &Olatunbosun,  S.  M.  (2008).Student, 
attendance,  teaching  strategies,  students'  Teacher  and  School  Environment  Factors  as 
Determinants  of  Achievement  in  Senor  Secondary 
previous  science  knowledge,  and  students' 
School  Chemistry  in  Oyo  State,  Nigeria. Journal  of 
involvement in chemistry class. 
international social research, 1(2). 
Recommendations 
Adodo, S. O., &Gbore, L. O. (2012).Prediction of attitude 
This  study  recommends  the  following  and interest of science students of different ability on 
measures  that  could  be  taken  to  enhance  their  academic  performance  in  basic 
science. International  Journal  of  psychology  and 
students'  chemistry  achievement  at  the 
Counselling, 4(6), 68-72. 
secondary  level  in  public  schools  of 
Akani,  O.  (2015).  Laboratory  Teaching:  Implication  on 
Muzaffarabad.  
Students'  Achievement  in  Chemistry  in  Secondary 
1. The lagging schools have very less use of AV  Schools in Ebonyi State of Nigeria. Journal of Education 
aids  in  chemistry  teaching.  School  and Practice, 6(30), 206-213. 
AKBAÞ, A., & Adnan, K. A. N. (2007). Affective factors that 
administration  should  ensure  that  teachers 
influence  chemistry  achievement  (motivation  and 
are using AV aids in chemistry teaching. Using 
anxiety)  and  the  power  of  these  factors  to  predict 
34 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| Abdullahi, O. F., & Onasaniya, S. A. (2010). Effect of   | None                                               |
|:---------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|
|                                                          | teacher effectiveness on Kwara State Secondary     |
|                                                          | School students’ achievement in                    |
|                                                          | Mathematics. Medwell Journals. Scientific research |
|                                                          | publishing company, 5(4p286-292).                  |

| Abudu, K. A., & Gbadamosi, M. R. (2014). Relationship   | None                                                   | None   | None     | None   | None              |
|:--------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------------|:-------|:---------|:-------|:------------------|
|                                                         | between teacher’s attitude and student’s academic      |        |          |        |                   |
|                                                         | achievement in senior secondary school chemistry. A    |        |          |        |                   |
|                                                         | case study of Ijebu-Ode and Odogbolu Local             |        |          |        |                   |
|                                                         | Government Area of Ogun state. Wudpecker Journal of    |        |          |        |                   |
|                                                         | Educational Research, 3(3), 035-043.                   |        |          |        |                   |
| Adalikwu, S. A., &Iorkpilgh, I. T.                      |                                                        |        |          | (2013) | .The Influence of |
|                                                         | Instructional Materials on Academic Performance of     |        |          |        |                   |
|                                                         | Senior Secondary School Students in Chemistry in Cross |        |          |        |                   |
|                                                         | River State. Global Journal of Educational             |        |          |        |                   |
|                                                         | Research, 12                                           | (1)    | , 39-46. |        |                   |

| None                                               | .Student,   |
|:---------------------------------------------------|:------------|
| Teacher and School Environment Factors as          |             |
| Determinants of Achievement in Senor Secondary     |             |
| School Chemistry in Oyo State, Nigeria. Journal of |             |
| international social research, 1                   |             |

| None                                                     | .Prediction of attitude   |
|:---------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------|
| and interest of science students of different ability on |                           |
| their academic performance in basic                      |                           |
| science. International Journal of psychology and         |                           |
| Counselling, 4                                           |                           |

| None                                                     | . Laboratory Teaching: Implication on   | None       |
|:---------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|:-----------|
| Students' Achievement in Chemistry in Secondary          |                                         |            |
| Schools in Ebonyi State of Nigeria. Journal of Education |                                         |            |
| and Practice, 6                                          | (30)                                    | , 206-213. |

| AKBAÞ, A., & Adnan, K. A. N. (2007). Affective factors that   | None                                               |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|
|                                                               | influence chemistry achievement (motivation and    |
|                                                               | anxiety) and the power of these factors to predict |

Belief and Perceptions About Chemistry Teaching and Learning           BWO-Research Intl. “Journal of Academic Research for Humanities (JARH) 4(2)” 
chemistry  achievement-II. Journal  of  Turkish  Science  Achievement  of  Senior  Secondary  School  Chemistry 
Education, 4(1), 10.  Students in Obio-Akpor Local Government Area. 
Alordiah,  C.  O.,  Akpadaka,  G.,  &Oviogbodu,  C.  O.  Oginni, A. M., Awobodu, V. Y., Alaka, M. O., & Saibu, S. O. 
(2015).The Influence of Gender, School Location and  (2013).  School  factors  as  correlates  of  students' 
Socio-Economic  Status  on  Students'  Academic  achievement  in  Chemistry. International  Journal  for 
Achievement in Mathematics. Journal of Education and  Cross-Disciplinary  Subjects  in  Education, 3(3),  1516-
Practice, 6(17), 130-136.  1523. 
Batool,  R.,  Dr.  Faqir  M.  Aslam  Rana,  &  Dr.  Hafiz  Sarwar, N., Khurram, F., & Fayyaz, sana. (2023). Impact of 
Muhammad  Qasim.  (2024).  Investigating  Gender  Practicing  Gratitude  on  Focus  and  Resilience  in 
Perceptions  on  Technology  Use  in  Pakistan  ELT  Classroom  Learning  among  University  Students:  A 
Classrooms:  A  Survey-Based  Study.  International  Qualitative Analysis. International "Journal of Academic 
"Journal of Academic Research for Humanities", 4(1),  Research for Humanities", 3(3), 65–73. Retrieved from 
58–63.  Retrieved  from  https://jar.bwo- https://jar.bwo-
 
researches.com/index.php/jarh/article/view/385 researches.com/index.php/jarh/article/view/294 
Badeleh,  A.,  &Sheela,  G.  (2011).  The  effects  of  Seery,  M.  K.  (2009).  The  role  of  prior  knowledge  and 
information  and  communication  technology  based  student  aptitude  in  undergraduate  performance  in 
approach and laboratory training model of teaching on  chemistry:  a  correlation-prediction  study. Chemistry 
achievement and retention I chemistry. Contemporary  Education Research and Practice, 10(3), 227-232. 
educational technology, 2(3), 213-237.  Singh,  H.,  Singh,  P.,  &  Sharma,  D.  (2023).  Faculty 
Brown, S. J., White, S., Sharma, B., Wakeling, L., Naiker,  acceptance  of  virtual  teaching  platforms  for  online 
M., Chandra, S. &Bilimoria, V. (2015).Attitude to the  teaching:  Moderating  role  of  resistance  to  change. 
Study  of  Chemistry  and  Its  Relationship  with  Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 39(6), 
Achievement  in  an  Introductory  Undergraduate  33–50. https://doi.org/10.14742/ajet.7529 
Course. Journal  of  the  Scholarship  of  Teaching  and  Tai,  R.  H.,  Sadler,  P.  M.,  &Loehr,  J.  F.  (2005).  Factors 
Learning, 15(2), 33-41.  influencing  success  in  introductory  college 
Bridge, C., Horey, D., Loch, B., Julien, B., & Thompson, B.  chemistry. Journal of Research in Science Teaching: The 
(2023). The impact of an innovators group on the  Official Journal of the National Association for Research 
development of a culture of innovation in the use of  in Science Teaching, 42(9), 987-1012. 
educational technologies. Australasian Journal of  Tong, X., Yu, L., & Deacon, S. H. (2024). A Meta-Analysis 
Educational Technology, 39(6), 17–32.  of the Relation Between Syntactic Skills and Reading 
https://doi.org/10.14742/ajet.8575  Comprehension: A Cross-Linguistic and Developmental 
Cavas,  P.  (2011).  Factors  affecting  the  motivation  of  Investigation.  Review  of  Educational  Research,  0(0). 
Turkish primary students for science learning. Science  https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543241228185 
Education International, 22(1), 31-42.  Van Orman, D. S. J., Gotch, C. M., & Carbonneau, K. J. 
Edomwonyi-Otu,L.,&Avaa,  A.  (2011).  The  challenge  of  (2024).  Preparing  Teacher  Candidates  to  Assess  for 
effective teaching of chemistry: A case study. Leonardo  Learning: A Systematic Review. Review of Educational 
Electronic Journal of Practices and Technologies, 10(18),  Research,  0(0). 
1-8.  https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543241233015 
Hofstein,  A.  (2004).  The  laboratory  in  chemistry  Wenglinsky, H. (2001). Teacher classroom practices and 
education:  Thirty  years  of  experience  with  student  performance:  How  schools  can  make  a 
developments,  implementation,  and  difference. ETS Research Report Series, 2001(2), i-37. 
research. Chemistry  education  research  and  Yenilmez, A., Sungur, S., &Tekkaya, C. (2006). Students' 
practice, 5(3), 247-264.  achievement  in  relation  to  reasoning  ability,  prior 
Korir, D. K., &Kipkemboi, F. (2014). The impact of school  knowledge  and  gender. Research  in  Science  & 
environment  and  peer  influences  on  students'  Technological Education, 24(1), 129-138. 
academic  performance  in  Vihiga  County,  Zareen,  S.  J,  Dr.  M.  Imran  Yousuf,  &  Sundus  Kurshid. 
Kenya. International Journal of Humanities and Social  (2023). A Thematic Analysis to Explore the Challenges 
Science, 4(5).  of Early Childhood Care and Education In Azad Jammu 
Kyalo, B. M. (2016). School factors influencing students'  &  Kashmir.  International  "Journal  of  Academic 
performance  in  Chemistry  in  Kenya  certificate  of  Research  for  Humanities",  3(4),  295–305.  Retrieved 
secondary education in Makueni County, Kenya.  from  https://jar.bwo-
Neuman,  L.  W.  (2007). Social  Research  Methods,  6/E.  researches.com/index.php/jarh/article/view/368 
Pearson Education India.   
Nkechinyere,  O.  M.,  &Ordu,  O.  K.  (2018)  Impact  of   
Collaborative  Learning  Strategy  on  the  Academic 
35 | P a g e     w w w . B W O - R e s e a r c h e s . c o m ,   P K - C A .  

| chemistry achievement-II. Journal of Turkish Science   |
|:-------------------------------------------------------|
| Education, 4(1), 10.                                   |

| Achievement of Senior Secondary School Chemistry   |
|:---------------------------------------------------|
| Students in Obio-Akpor Local Government Area.      |

| Alordiah, C. O., Akpadaka, G., &Oviogbodu, C. O.   | None                                                 | None                                          |
|:---------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------|
|                                                    |                                                      | .The Influence of Gender, School Location and |
|                                                    | Socio-Economic Status on Students' Academic          |                                               |
|                                                    | Achievement in Mathematics. Journal of Education and |                                               |
|                                                    | Practice, 6                                          |                                               |

| Oginni, A. M., Awobodu, V. Y., Alaka, M. O., & Saibu, S. O.   | None                                                | None                                        | None    |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------------|:--------|
|                                                               |                                                     | . School factors as correlates of students' |         |
|                                                               | achievement in Chemistry. International Journal for |                                             |         |
|                                                               | Cross-Disciplinary Subjects in Education, 3         |                                             | , 1516- |
|                                                               | 1523.                                               |                                             |         |

| None                                                  | None   | None       | . The effects of   |
|:------------------------------------------------------|:-------|:-----------|:-------------------|
| information and communication technology based        |        |            |                    |
| approach and laboratory training model of teaching on |        |            |                    |
| achievement and retention I chemistry. Contemporary   |        |            |                    |
| educational technology, 2                             | (3)    | , 213-237. |                    |

| None                                                 | . The role of prior knowledge and   |
|:-----------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------|
| student aptitude in undergraduate performance in     |                                     |
| chemistry: a correlation-prediction study. Chemistry |                                     |
| Education Research and Practice, 10                  |                                     |

| Brown, S. J., White, S., Sharma, B., Wakeling, L., Naiker,   | None                                               | None   | None             |
|:-------------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------------------------------------|:-------|:-----------------|
|                                                              | M., Chandra, S. &Bilimoria, V.                     | (2015) | .Attitude to the |
|                                                              | Study of Chemistry and Its Relationship with       |        |                  |
|                                                              | Achievement in an Introductory Undergraduate       |        |                  |
|                                                              | Course. Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching and |        |                  |
|                                                              | Learning, 15(                                      |        |                  |

| None                                                      | . Factors   |
|:----------------------------------------------------------|:------------|
| influencing success in introductory college               |             |
| chemistry. Journal of Research in Science Teaching: The   |             |
| Official Journal of the National Association for Research |             |
| in Science Teaching, 42                                   |             |

| None                                                   | . Factors affecting the motivation of   |
|:-------------------------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------|
| Turkish primary students for science learning. Science |                                         |
| Education International, 22                            |                                         |

| None                                                    | . The challenge of   |
|:--------------------------------------------------------|:---------------------|
| effective teaching of chemistry: A case study. Leonardo |                      |
| Electronic Journal of Practices and Technologies, 10    |                      |
| 1-8.                                                    |                      |

| None                                       | None   | None       | . The laboratory in chemistry   |
|:-------------------------------------------|:-------|:-----------|:--------------------------------|
| education: Thirty years of experience with |        |            |                                 |
| developments, implementation, and          |        |            |                                 |
| research. Chemistry education research and |        |            |                                 |
| practice, 5                                | (3)    | , 247-264. |                                 |

| None                                   | None                                                | . Teacher classroom practices and   | None   | None        | None    |
|:---------------------------------------|:----------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------|:-------|:------------|:--------|
|                                        | student performance: How schools can make a         |                                     |        |             |         |
|                                        | difference. ETS Research Report Series, 2001        |                                     |        | (2)         | , i-37. |
| Yenilmez, A., Sungur, S., &Tekkaya, C. |                                                     |                                     | (2006) | . Students' |         |
|                                        | achievement in relation to reasoning ability, prior |                                     |        |             |         |
|                                        | knowledge and gender. Research in Science &         |                                     |        |             |         |
|                                        | Technological Education, 24                         |                                     |        |             |         |

| None         | None                                                  | . The impact of school   |
|:-------------|:------------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------|
|              | environment and peer influences on students'          |                          |
|              | academic performance in Vihiga County,                |                          |
|              | Kenya. International Journal of Humanities and Social |                          |
|              | Science, 4(                                           |                          |
| Kyalo, B. M. |                                                       |                          |

| None                                             | . School factors influencing students'   |
|:-------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------|
| performance in Chemistry in Kenya certificate of |                                          |
| secondary education in Makueni County, Kenya.    |                                          |

| None                                            | Impact of   |
|:------------------------------------------------|:------------|
| Collaborative Learning Strategy on the Academic |             |