Supplementary File 1:  
 
The bacterial hitchhiker’s guide to COI: Universal primer-based COI capture probes 
fail to exclude bacterial DNA, but 16S capture leaves metazoa behind 
 
Authors: Sanni Hintikka, Jeanette Carlsson, Jens Carlsson 
 
Section 1 - Sampling and Filtering protocols 
Site description and sampling protocol 
Tela – Honduras  
The  study area  of  Tela  Bay  (15°46'42.4"N 87°28'23.7"W),  on  the  north  coast  of 
Honduras, has a tropical rainforest climate (no dry season, increased rainfall between 
October and December) with an offshore coral reef (Banco Capiro, 15°51'48.6"N 
87°29'42.9"W). The coral reef is part of the Meso-American Barrier Reef (second 
largest barrier reef system in the world) and lies approximately 8km north from the 
coast of Tela, a town with a population of ca. 38K people. We used 5 eDNA samples 
from two subsites on the reef each, for a total of 10 eDNA samples. The samples were 
collected using a submersible Ruttner sampler lowered to 10m depth, which was 
sterilised with 10% bleach between each sampling point. The water collected by the 
Ruttner  sampler  was  dispensed  into  re-usable  1L  sampling  bottles.  To  minimise 
contamination, these re-usable sampling bottles were sterilised prior to sampling by 
submersing them in 10% bleach for a minimum of 20 minutes, followed by a tap water 
rinse and placing them in the sun (caps closed) for natural UV exposure for a minimum 
of 20 minutes. 
Filtering protocol 
Filtering of water samples was performed in a dedicated room onsite. Only persons 
directly involved in the filtering process were allowed into the filtering room during the 
process to minimise risk of contamination. Filtering equipment (filter funnels, trays, 
tweezers, etc.) were sterilised using a similar approach, with a 10% bleach bath for 20 
min, followed by rinse with tap water and dry in an access-controlled room. The filter 
funnels were assembled using sterilised equipment (trays and tweezers), stored in 
new clean ziplock bags and placed in the sun for UV exposure for a minimum 20 min. 
For each ecological replicate collected, 1L of water was filtered through a Whatman® 
glass microfiber  filter (Grade 934-AH®, pore  size  1.5  µm),  and stored  in a 2mL 
screwcap tube with silica beads to help remove any remaining moisture that could 
accelerate DNA degradation. If a filter got  saturated before 1L had been filtered 
through, a second filter was used for the remaining water, and the amount of water 
filtered through each was noted. The tubes containing the eDNA filters were stored 
out of sunlight at -20 ˚C until transportation to University College Dublin, Ireland, for 
laboratory processing.  
   

 
Table 1: Summary eDNA sample extracts used in the experiment.   带格式的: 题注, 与下段同页
sample_id  description  extract_conc  A260/A230  A260/A280  vol(ul) 
A  Small_outcrop  3.99  1.335  2.008  100 
B  Small_outcrop  2.19  11.516  1.84  100  格式化表格
C  Small_outcrop  4.343  1.854  1.854  100 
D  Small_outcrop  6.885  2.386  1.772  100  格式化表格
E  Small_outcrop  2.358  6.586  1.736  100 
F  Reef_proper  5.245  1.616  1.616  100  格式化表格
G  Reef_proper  5.854  3.157  1.519  100 
H  Reef_proper  6.221  5.096  1.931  100  格式化表格
I  Reef_proper  5.374  1.593  1.593  100 
J  Reef_proper  1.304  -0.484  1  100  格式化表格
EB  extraction_blank  0.617  -0.447  1  100 
   

|    | sample_id   |    |    | description      |    |    |   extract_conc |    |    |   A260/A230 |    |    |   A260/A280 |    |    |   vol(ul) |    |
|:---|:------------|:---|:---|:-----------------|:---|:---|---------------:|:---|:---|------------:|:---|:---|------------:|:---|:---|----------:|:---|
|    | A           |    |    | Small_outcrop    |    |    |          3.99  |    |    |       1.335 |    |    |       2.008 |    |    |       100 |    |
|    | B           |    |    |                  |    |    |                |    |    |             |    |    |             |    |    |           |    |
|    | C           |    |    | Small_outcrop    |    |    |          4.343 |    |    |       1.854 |    |    |       1.854 |    |    |       100 |    |
|    | D           |    |    |                  |    |    |                |    |    |             |    |    |             |    |    |           |    |
|    | E           |    |    | Small_outcrop    |    |    |          2.358 |    |    |       6.586 |    |    |       1.736 |    |    |       100 |    |
|    | F           |    |    |                  |    |    |                |    |    |             |    |    |             |    |    |           |    |
|    | G           |    |    | Reef_proper      |    |    |          5.854 |    |    |       3.157 |    |    |       1.519 |    |    |       100 |    |
|    | H           |    |    |                  |    |    |                |    |    |             |    |    |             |    |    |           |    |
|    | I           |    |    | Reef_proper      |    |    |          5.374 |    |    |       1.593 |    |    |       1.593 |    |    |       100 |    |
|    | J           |    |    |                  |    |    |                |    |    |             |    |    |             |    |    |           |    |
|    | EB          |    |    | extraction_blank |    |    |          0.617 |    |    |      -0.447 |    |    |       1     |    |    |       100 |    |

Section 2 - Sequence information 
Sample identifier tags 
Table S1: Tags used in 5’ end of forward and reverse primers. The tags were the 
same for forward and reverse primers, with the same numbering order (i.e., f1 = 5’-
TAG1-FWD_primer-3’; r1 = 5’-TAG1-REV_primer-3’) 
TAG  TAG_NR 
AGACGC  1 
AGTGTA  2 
ACTAGC  3 
ACAGTC  4 
ATCGAC  5 
ATGTCG  6 
CTCTAG  7 
CATCAC  8 
TACGAG  9 
ACTCTG  10 
 
 
Section 3 - Bioinformatics  
Demultiplexing with cutadapt 
COI library: 
$ cutadapt \ 
-e 0.08 --no-indels -g file:fwd.fasta -G file:rev.fasta \ 
-o COI/1_demux/{name1}-{name2}_1.fastq \ 
-p COI/1_demux/{name1}-{name2}_2.fastq \ 
COI_R1.fastq COI_R2.fastq --minimum-length 100 > COI/fwd_orient.cutadapt.stat 
 
$ cutadapt \ 
-e 0.08 --no-indels -G file:fwd.fasta -g file:rev.fasta \ 
-o COI/2_demux/{name1}-{name2}_1.fastq \ 
-p COI/2_demux/{name1}-{name2}_2.fastq \ 
COI_R1.fastq COI_R2.fastq --minimum-length 100 > COI/rev_orient.cutadapt.stat 
 
16S library: 
$ cutadapt \ 
-e 0.08 --no-indels -g file:fwd_bac.fasta -G file:rev_bac.fasta \ 
-o BAC/1_demux/{name1}-{name2}_1.fastq \ 
-p BAC/1_demux/{name1}-{name2}_2.fastq \ 
BAC_R1.fastq BAC_R2.fastq --minimum-length 100 > BAC/fwd_orient.cutadapt.stat 
 
$ cutadapt \ 
-e 0.08 --no-indels -G file:fwd_bac.fasta -g file:rev_bac.fasta \ 
-o BAC/2_demux/{name1}-{name2}_1.fastq \ 
-p BAC/2_demux/{name1}-{name2}_2.fastq \ 
BAC_R1.fastq BAC_R2.fastq --minimum-length 100 > BAC/rev_orient.cutadapt.stat 
 

| TAG    |   TAG_NR |
|:-------|---------:|
| AGACGC |        1 |
| AGTGTA |        2 |
| ACTAGC |        3 |
| ACAGTC |        4 |
| ATCGAC |        5 |
| ATGTCG |        6 |
| CTCTAG |        7 |
| CATCAC |        8 |
| TACGAG |        9 |
| ACTCTG |       10 |

The resulting .fastq files that matched used tag combinations were renamed with the 
corresponding sample names using multiple move command mmv with a .txt sample 
index file: 
sample index file format: 
f1-r1_[12].fastq matched/A1_#1.fastq 
f1-r2_[12].fastq matched/A2_#1.fastq 
f1-r3_[12].fastq matched/A3_#1.fastq 
… 
 
 
Section 4 - Results 
 
 
Figure S1: Relative abundance of kingdoms detected in the 16S library.  

 
Figure S2: Relative abundance of phyla detected in the 16S library. 