A Review of Biotic Interactions and Taxon Names Found 
in globalbioticinteractions/kalro2023 
by Nomer and Elton, two naive review bots 
review@globalbioticinteractions.org 
https://globalbioticinteractions.org/contribute 
https://github.com/globalbioticinteractions/kalro2023/issues 
2024-02-11 
Abstract 
Life on Earth is sustained by complex interactions between organisms and their environment. These 
biotic interactions can be captured in datasets and published digitally. We describe a review process 
of such an openly accessible digital interactions dataset of known origin, and discuss their outcome. 
The dataset under review (aka globalbioticinteractions/kalro2023) has size 410KiB and contains 
1023 interactions with 8 unique types of associations (e.g., pollinates) between 512 primary taxa 
(e.g., Apis mellifera) and 331 associated taxa (e.g., Persea americana). The report includes detailed 
summaries of interactions data as well as a taxonomic review from multiple perspectives. 
Table of Contents 
Introduction .............................................................................................................................................. 2 
Data Review ..................................................................................................................................... 2 
Methods ...................................................................................................................................................... 2 
Results ......................................................................................................................................................... 3 
Biotic Interactions ......................................................................................................................... 3 
Interaction Networks ......................................................................................................... 8 
Taxonomic Alignment.................................................................................................................. 9 
Additional Reviews .................................................................................................................... 13 
GloBI Review Badge .................................................................................................................. 14 
GloBI Index Badge ...................................................................................................................... 14 
Discussion ............................................................................................................................................... 15 
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................................. 15 
References .............................................................................................................................................. 15 

 
Introduction 
Data Review 
Data review can be a time consuming process, especially when done manually. This 
review report aims to help facilitate data review of species interaction claims made 
in datasets registered with Global Biotic Interactions (Poelen, Simons, and Mungall 
2014). The review includes summary statistics of, and observations about, the 
dataset under review: 
A review of the status of web-based African Plant-Pollinator Interaction 
data. file:///home/runner/work/kalro2023/kalro2023/./ 
For additional metadata related to this dataset, please visit 
https://github.com/globalbioticinteractions/kalro2023 and inspect associated 
metadata files including, but not limited to, README.md, eml.xml, and/or globi.json. 
Methods 
The review is performed through programmatic scripts that leverage tools like 
Preston, Elton, Nomer combined with third-party tools like grep, mlr, tail and head. 
Tools used in this review process 
tool name  version 
elton  0.13.2 
nomer  0.5.6 
mlr  6.0.0 
pandoc  3.1.6.1 
The review process can be described in the form of the script below 1. 
# get versioned copy of the dataset (size approx.  410KiB) under review
  
elton pull globalbioticinteractions/kalro2023 
 
 
1 Note that you have to first get the data (e.g., via elton pull 
globalbioticinteractions/kalro2023) before being able to generate reviews (e.g., 
elton review globalbioticinteractions/kalro2023), extract interaction claims (e.g., 
elton interactions globalbioticinteractions/kalro2023), or list taxonomic names (e.g., 
elton names globalbioticinteractions/kalro2023) 

# generate review notes 
elton review globalbioticinteractions/kalro2023\ 
 > review.tsv 
 
# export indexed interaction records 
elton interactions globalbioticinteractions/kalro2023\ 
 > interactions.tsv 
 
# export names and align them with the Catalogue of Life using Nomer  
elton names globalbioticinteractions/kalro2023\ 
 | nomer append col\ 
 > name-alignment.tsv 
or visually, in a process diagram. 
                                                                                                
                                                                                           
                                                                    
 
Review Process Overview 
You can find a recent copy of the full review script at check-data.sh. 
Results 
In the following sections, the results of the review are summarized 2. Then, links to 
the detailed review reports are provided. 
Biotic Interactions 
     
                                                   
                      
                   
 
Biotic Interaction Data Model 
 
2 Disclaimer: The results in this review should be considered friendly, yet naive, 
notes from an unsophisticated robot. Please keep that in mind when considering the 
review results. 

In this review, biotic interactions (or biotic associations) are modeled as a primary 
(aka subject, source) organism interacting with an associate (aka object, target) 
organism. The dataset under review classified the primary/associate organisms 
with specific taxa. The primary and associate organisms The kind of interaction is 
documented as an interaction type. 
The dataset under review (aka globalbioticinteractions/kalro2023) has size 410KiB 
and contains 1023 interactions with 8 unique types of associations (e.g., pollinates) 
between 512 primary taxa (e.g., Apis mellifera) and 331 associated taxa (e.g., Persea 
americana). 
An exhaustive list of indexed interaction claims can be found in csv and tsv archives. 
To facilitate discovery, the first 500 claims available on the html page at indexed-
interactions.html are shown below. 
The exhaustive list was used to create the following data summaries below. 
Sample of Indexed Interaction Claims 
interactionTypeNa
sourceTaxonName  me  targetTaxonName  referenceCitation 
Leptoconchus  parasiteOf  Fungia (Cycloseris)  Gittenberger, A., 
incycloseris  costulata  Gittenberger, E. 
(2011). Cryptic, 
adaptive radiation 
of endoparasitic 
snails: sibling 
species of 
Leptoconchus 
(Gastropoda: 
Coralliophilidae) in 
corals. Org Divers 
Evol, 11(1), 21–41. 
doi:10.1007/s1312
7-011-0039-1 
Leptoconchus  parasiteOf  Fungia (Fungia)  Gittenberger, A., 
infungites  fungites  Gittenberger, E. 
(2011). Cryptic, 
adaptive radiation 
of endoparasitic 
snails: sibling 
species of 
Leptoconchus 
(Gastropoda: 
Coralliophilidae) in 
corals. Org Divers 
Evol, 11(1), 21–41. 

interactionTypeNa
sourceTaxonName  me  targetTaxonName  referenceCitation 
doi:10.1007/s1312
7-011-0039-1 
Leptoconchus  parasiteOf  Sandalolitha  Gittenberger, A., 
ingrandifungi  dentata  Gittenberger, E. 
(2011). Cryptic, 
adaptive radiation 
of endoparasitic 
snails: sibling 
species of 
Leptoconchus 
(Gastropoda: 
Coralliophilidae) in 
corals. Org Divers 
Evol, 11(1), 21–41. 
doi:10.1007/s1312
7-011-0039-1 
Leptoconchus  parasiteOf  Fungia  Gittenberger, A., 
ingranulosa  (Wellsofungia)  Gittenberger, E. 
granulosa  (2011). Cryptic, 
adaptive radiation 
of endoparasitic 
snails: sibling 
species of 
Leptoconchus 
(Gastropoda: 
Coralliophilidae) in 
corals. Org Divers 
Evol, 11(1), 21–41. 
doi:10.1007/s1312
7-011-0039-1 
 
Most Frequently Mentioned Interaction Types (up to 20 most frequent) 
interactionTypeName  count 
pollinates  338 
acquiresNutrientsFrom  294 
visits  197 
visitsFlowersOf  184 
parasiteOf  11 
preysOn  2 

interactionTypeName  count 
parasitoidOf  1 
hostOf  1 
 
Most Frequently Mentioned Primary Taxa (up to 20 most frequent) 
sourceTaxonName  count 
Apis mellifera  121 
Apis melifera  38 
Megachile sp. 2  16 
Agrius convolvuli  14 
Macrogalea candida  12 
Pseudapis sp.  12 
Ceratina sp. 3  10 
Xylocopa sp.  10 
Apis melliferra  9 
Apis mellifera Linnaeus  9 
Amegilla sp. 1  8 
Xylocopa caffra  7 
Xylocopa nigrita  7 
Xylocopa flavorufa  7 
Hypotrigona gribodoi  7 
Meliponula ferruginea  6 
Lasioglosum sp.  6 
Braunsapis sp.  6 
Catopsilia florella  6 
 
Most Frequently Mentioned Associate Taxa (up to 20 most frequent) 
targetTaxonName  count 
Persea americana  48 
Helianthus annuus L.  30 
Acacia tortilis  29 
Arctotheca calendula(Cape Marigold)  29 
Vernonia cinerea  25 
Sesamum indicum  22 
Citrullus lanatus  21 

targetTaxonName  count 
Agathisanthemum bojeri Klotzsch  20 
Mangifera indica  20 
Coffee arabica  17 
Phaseolus vulgaris  16 
Phaseolus coccineus  15 
Helianthus annuus L  14 
Trifolium alexandrinum  13 
Cucumis sativus  13 
Phaseolus vulgaris L  12 
Agathisanthemum bojeri  11 
Zygophyllum sp.  11 
Cucumis melo  11 
 
Most Frequent Interactions between Primary and Associate Taxa (up to 20 most 
frequent) 
interactionTypeNa
sourceTaxonName  me  targetTaxonName  count 
Asclepias cucullata  pollinates  Sisyranthus  3 
trichostomus 
Xylocopa caffra  acquiresNutrientsF Rhynchosia  2 
rom  velutina 
Steganomus sp.  acquiresNutrientsF Crotalaria  2 
rom  emarginata Benth 
Megachile sp. 2  acquiresNutrientsF Indigofera  2 
rom  paniculata 
Xylocopa flavicollis  acquiresNutrientsF Rhynchosia  2 
DeGeer  rom  velutina Wight & 
Arn. 
Apis mellifera  pollinates  Mangifera indica  2 
scutellata 
Apis mellifera  pollinates  Helianthus annuus  2 
scutellata 
Braunsapis spp.  visits  Lantana camara  2 
Belenois aurota  visitsFlowersOf  Helianthus annuus  2 
Fabricius  L. 
Hemipepsis hilaris  pollinates  Xysmalobium  2 
Smith  involucratum 

interactionTypeNa
sourceTaxonName  me  targetTaxonName  count 
Leptoconchus  parasiteOf  Fungia (Cycloseris)  1 
incycloseris  costulata 
Leptoconchus  parasiteOf  Fungia (Fungia)  1 
infungites  fungites 
Leptoconchus  parasiteOf  Sandalolitha  1 
ingrandifungi  dentata 
Leptoconchus  parasiteOf  Fungia  1 
ingranulosa  (Wellsofungia) 
granulosa 
Leptoconchus  parasiteOf  Herpolitha limax  1 
inlimax 
Leptoconchus  parasiteOf  Halomitra pileus  1 
inpileus 
Leptoconchus  parasiteOf  Fungia (Pleuractis)  1 
inpleuractis  gravis 
Leptoconchus  parasiteOf  Fungia (Pleuractis)  1 
inpleuractis  moluccensis 
Leptoconchus  parasiteOf  Fungia (Pleuractis)  1 
inpleuractis  paumotensis 
Interaction Networks 
The figures below provide a graph view on the dataset under review. The first 
shows a summary network on the kingdom level, and the second shows how 
interactions on the family level. Note that both network graphs were first aligned 
taxonomically via the Catalogue of Life. Please refer to the original (or verbatim) 
taxonomic names for a more original view on the interaction data. 
               
 
Interactions on taxonomic kingdom rank as interpreted by the Catalogue of Life 
download svg 

                                   
             
                                              
             
                      
                  
                     
          
                    
                           
                      
                       
                                
                               
                                          
        
                                    
                                  
          
                        
             
                               
                                              
                      
           
         
                      
          
Interactions on the taxonomic family rank as interpreted by the Catalogue of Life. 
download svg 
You can download the indexed dataset under review at indexed-interactions.csv. A 
tab-separated file can be found at indexed-interactions.tsv 
Learn more about the structure of this download at GloBI website, by opening a 
GitHub issue, or by sending an email. 
Another way to discover the dataset under review is by searching for it on the GloBI 
website. 
Taxonomic Alignment 
As part of the review, all names are aligned against various name catalogs (e.g., col, 
ncbi, discoverlife, gbif, itis, globi, mdd, tpt, and pbdb). These alignments may serve 
as a way to review name usage or aid in selecting of a suitable taxonomic name 
resource to use. 
Sample of Name Alignments 
providedName  relationName  resolvedCatalogName  resolvedName 
Dialictus  NONE  col  Dialictus 
Pseudalpis  NONE  col  Pseudalpis 
Brevispica  NONE  col  Brevispica 
Etbaica  NONE  col  Etbaica 
 

Distribution of Taxonomic Ranks of Aligned Names by Catalog. Names that were not 
aligned with a catalog are counted as NAs. So, the total number of unaligned names 
for a catalog will be listed in their NA row. 
resolvedCatalogName  resolvedRank  count 
tpt  NA  642 
tpt  genus  1 
tpt  species  1 
pbdb  NA  568 
pbdb  genus  47 
pbdb  family  15 
pbdb  species  7 
pbdb  order  3 
pbdb  subfamily  3 
pbdb  class  1 
ncbi  species  284 
ncbi  NA  240 
ncbi  genus  90 
ncbi  subgenus  15 
ncbi  family  14 
ncbi  subspecies  4 
ncbi  subfamily  4 
ncbi  order  3 
ncbi  species group  1 
ncbi  class  1 
mdd  NA  644 
itis  NA  336 
itis  species  217 
itis  genus  68 
itis  family  14 
itis  subfamily  3 
itis  order  3 
itis  variety  1 
itis  subspecies  1 
itis  class  1 
globi  NA  442 
globi  species  314 

resolvedCatalogName  resolvedRank  count 
globi  genus  150 
globi  family  19 
globi  subgenus  14 
globi  subspecies  10 
globi  order  7 
globi  variety  5 
globi  subfamily  5 
globi  form  3 
globi  superfamily  2 
globi  subclass  1 
globi  species group  1 
globi  class  1 
gbif  species  353 
gbif  NA  168 
gbif  genus  103 
gbif  family  15 
gbif  subspecies  8 
gbif  order  3 
gbif  variety  2 
gbif  class  1 
discoverlife  NA  559 
discoverlife  species  85 
col  species  337 
col  NA  194 
col  genus  91 
col  family  14 
col  subspecies  7 
col  order  3 
col  subfamily  2 
col  section  1 
col  variety  1 
col  class  1 
 
Name relationship types per catalog. Name relationship type “NONE” means that a 
name was not recognized by the associated catalog. “SAME_AS” indicates either a 

“HAS_ACCEPTED_NAME” or “SYNONYM_OF” name relationship type. We recognize 
that “SYNONYM_OF” encompasses many types of nomenclatural synonymies (ICZN 
1999) (e.g., junior synonym, senior synonyms). 
resolvedCatalogName  relationName  count 
col  NONE  208 
col  HAS_ACCEPTED_NAME  592 
col  SYNONYM_OF  163 
discoverlife  NONE  731 
discoverlife  HAS_ACCEPTED_NAME  94 
discoverlife  SYNONYM_OF  29 
discoverlife  HOMONYM_OF  5 
gbif  HAS_ACCEPTED_NAME  720 
gbif  NONE  180 
gbif  SYNONYM_OF  300 
globi  SAME_AS  8056 
globi  NONE  260 
itis  NONE  381 
itis  HAS_ACCEPTED_NAME  427 
itis  SYNONYM_OF  39 
mdd  NONE  841 
ncbi  SAME_AS  601 
ncbi  NONE  262 
ncbi  SYNONYM_OF  34 
pbdb  NONE  690 
pbdb  HAS_ACCEPTED_NAME  149 
pbdb  SYNONYM_OF  8 
tpt  NONE  839 
tpt  HAS_ACCEPTED_NAME  2 
 
List of Available Name Alignment Reports 
catalog name  alignment results 
col  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
ncbi  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
discoverlife  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 

catalog name  alignment results 
gbif  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
itis  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
globi  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
mdd  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
tpt  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
pbdb  associated names alignments (first 500, 
full csv/tsv) 
Additional Reviews 
Elton, Nomer, and other tools may have difficulties interpreting existing species 
interaction datasets. Or, they may misbehave, or otherwise show unexpected 
behavior. As part of the review process, detailed review notes are kept that 
document possibly misbehaving, or confused, review bots. An sample of review 
notes associated with this review can be found below. 
First few lines in the review notes. 
reviewDate  reviewCommentType  reviewComment 
2024-02-11T20:23:14Z  note  found unsupported 
interaction type with 
name: [Honey production] 
2024-02-11T20:23:14Z  note  found malformed doi 
[doi.org/10.1093/aob/mc
v137] 
2024-02-11T20:23:14Z  note  found malformed doi 
[doi.org/10.1093/aob/mc
v138] 
2024-02-11T20:23:14Z  note  found malformed doi 
[doi.org/10.1093/aob/mc
v139] 
In addtion, you can find the most frequently occurring notes in the table below. 
Most frequently occurring review notes, if any. 
reviewComment  count 
found unsupported interaction type with name: [Honey production]  1 

reviewComment  count 
found malformed doi [doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcv137]  1 
found malformed doi [doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcv138]  1 
found malformed doi [doi.org/10.1093/aob/mcv139]  1 
For addition information on review notes, please have a look at the first 500 Review 
Notes or the download full csv or tsv archives. 
GloBI Review Badge 
As part of the review, a review badge is generated. This review badge can be 
included in webpages to indicate the review status of the dataset under review. 
 
Sample of a GloBI Review Badge 3 
Note that if the badge is green, no review notes were generated. If the badge is 
yellow, the review bots may need some help with interpreting the species 
interaction data. 
GloBI Index Badge 
If the dataset under review has been registered with GloBI, and has been succesfully 
indexed by GloBI, the GloBI Index Status Badge will turn green. This means that the 
dataset under review was indexed by GloBI and is available through GloBI services 
and derived data products. 
 
Sample of a GloBI Index Badge 4 
If you’d like to keep track of reviews or index status of the dataset under review, 
please visit GloBI’s dataset index 5 for badge examples. 
 
3 Up-to-date status of the GloBI Review Badge can be retrieved from the GloBI 
Review Depot 
4 Up-to-date status of the GloBI Index Badge can be retrieved from GloBI’s API 
5 At time of writing (2024-02-11) the version of the GloBI dataset index was 
available at 
[https://globalbioticinteractions.org/datasets](https://globalbioticinteractions.org
/datasets) 

Discussion 
This review is intended to provide a perspective on the dataset to aid understanding 
of species interaction claims discovered. However, this review should not be 
considered as fitness of use or other kind of quality assessment. Instead, the review 
may be used as in indication of the open-ness6 and FAIRness (Wilkinson et al. 2016; 
Trekels et al. 2023) of the dataset: in order to perform this review, the data was 
likely openly available, Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable. Currently, 
this Open-FAIR assessment is qualitative, and with measurement units specified, a 
more quantitative approach can be implemented. 
This report also showcases the reuse of machine-actionable (meta)data, something 
highly recommended by the FAIR Data Principles (Wilkinson et al. 2016). Making 
(meta)data machine-actionable means that it can be more precisely processed by 
computers, enabling even naive review bots like Nomer and Elton to interpret the 
data effectively. This capability is crucial for not just automating the generation of 
reports, but also to facilitate seamless data exchanges, i.e., interoperability. 
Acknowledgements 
We thank the many humans that created us and those who created and maintained 
the data, software and other intellectual resources that were used for producing this 
review. In addition, we are grateful for the natural resources providing the basis for 
these human and bot activities. 
References 
ICZN. 1999. “International Code of Zoological Nomenclature.” The International 
Trust for Zoological Nomenclature, London, UK. https://www.iczn.org/the-
code/the-code-online/. 
Poelen, Jorrit H., James D. Simons, and Chris J. Mungall. 2014. “Global Biotic 
Interactions: An Open Infrastructure to Share and Analyze Species-Interaction 
Datasets.” Ecological Informatics 24 (November): 148–59. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoinf.2014.08.005. 
Trekels, Maarten, Debora Pignatari Drucker, José Augusto Salim, Jeff Ollerton, Jorrit 
Poelen, Filipi Miranda Soares, Max Rünzel, Muo Kasina, Quentin Groom, and 
Mariano Devoto. 2023. “WorldFAIR Project (D10.1) Agriculture-related pollinator 
 
6 According to http://opendefinition.org/: “Open data is data that can be freely used, 
re-used and redistributed by anyone - subject only, at most, to the requirement to 
attribute and sharealike.” 

data standards use cases report.” Zenodo. 
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8176978. 
Wilkinson, Mark D., Michel Dumontier, IJsbrand Jan Aalbersberg, Gabrielle Appleton, 
Myles Axton, Arie Baak, Niklas Blomberg, et al. 2016. “The FAIR Guiding Principles 
for Scientific Data Management and Stewardship.” Scientific Data 3 (1). 
https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2016.18. 