Classic Computer Science Problems in Python
This repository contains source code to accompany the book Classic Computer Science Problems in
Python by David Kopec. You will find the source organized by chapter. As you read the book, each
code listing contains a file name that corresponds to a file in this repository.
Get the Book
• Manning the publisher sells both hard copy and DRM‑free eBook editions
• Amazon if you buy the hard copy from Amazon, it will come with a way to download the eBook
for free from the publisher
Versioning and Packages
The source code in this repository requires Python 3.7 and installation of the typing_extensions
package. Due to its extensive use of Python 3.7 features (data classes, advanced type hints,
etc.), most of the source code will not work with earlier versions of Python. You can install
the typing_extensions package with pip3 install typing_extensions or pip
install typing_extensions depending on your Python/pip setup.
1

Questions about the Book
You can find general questions and descriptive information about the book on the Classic Computer
ScienceProblemswebsite. Also,feelfreetoreachouttomeonTwitter,@davekopec. Ifyouthinkyou
found an error in the source code, please open an issue up here on GitHub.
Free Content Based on the Book
• Article: Constraint‑Satisfaction Problems in Python
License
All of the source code in this repository is released under the Apache License version 2.0. See
LICENSE.
Other Books and Languages
Official Books from the Series by @davecom ‑ Classic Computer Science Problems in Java ‑ Classic
Computer Science Problems in Swift
Ports‑C++implementationby@aray‑andres‑Goimplementationby@arlima‑PHPimplementation
by @SaschaKersken (German translator of CCSPiP) ‑ JavaScript implementation by @SaschaKersken
(GermantranslatorofCCSPiP)‑Rubyimplementationby@tj84‑Rustimplementationby@marpeter‑
contribs
2