Manuscript submitted to BiophysicalJournal
Article
A Mechanical Instability in Planar Epithelial Monolayers
Leads to Cell Extrusion
Satoru Okuda1,2,* and Koichi Fujimoto3
0202 rpA 32  ]BC.oib-q[  2v48910.0181:viXra
1WPI Nano Life Science Institute (WPI-NanoLSI),Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan
2PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan
3Graduate School of Sciences, Osaka University, Toyonaka 560-0043, Japan
*Correspondence: satokuda@staff.kanazawa-u.ac.jp
ABSTRACT In cell extrusion,a cell embeddedin an epithelialmonolayerlosesitsapicalor basalsurface and is subsequently
squeezed out of the monolayer by neighboringcells. Cell extrusions occur during apoptosis, epithelial-mesenchymaltransition,
or pre-cancerous cell invasion. They play important roles in embryogenesis, homeostasis, carcinogenesis, and many other
biological processes. Although many of the molecular factors involved in cell extrusion are known, little is known about the
mechanicalbasisofcellextrusion.Weusedathree-dimensional(3D)vertexmodeltoinvestigatethemechanicalstabilityofcells
arranged in a monolayer with 3D foam geometry. We found that when the cells composing the monolayer have homogeneous
mechanical properties, cells are extruded from the monolayer when the symmetry of the 3D geometry is broken due to an
increase in cell density or a decrease in the number of topological neighbors around single cells. Those results suggest that
mechanical instabilityinherent in the 3D foam geometry of epithelialmonolayers is sufficient to drive epithelialcell extrusion. In
the situation where cells in the monolayer actively generate contractile or adhesive forces under the control of intrinsic genetic
programs, the forces act to break the symmetry of the monolayer, leading to cell extrusion that is directed to the apical or basal
side of the monolayer by the balance of contractile and adhesive forces on the apical and basal sides. Although our analyses
are based on a simple mechanical model, our results are in accordance with observations of epithelialmonolayers in vivo and
consistentlyexplain cell extrusions under a wide range of physiologicaland pathophysiologicalconditions. Our results illustrate
the importance of a mechanical understanding of cell extrusion and provide a basis by which to link molecular regulation to
physical processes.
STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE
Epithelialcellextrusionis importantforbiologicalprocessessuchasembryogenesis,homeostasis,andcarcinogenesis.Various
molecular factors, such as cancer genes and their products, have been reported as key drivers of epithelial extrusion; however,
littleis knownabouthowthese factorsarelinkedtothemechanicalprocess.A simplemathematicalmodelbasedonmechanics
can consistently explain cell extrusions under a wide range of physiological and pathophysiological conditions. The model
shows that cells can be extruded from homogeneous sheets, owing to the inherent mechanical instability of the 3D foam
geometryof the epithelial monolayer.When the cells generate active forces, the forces act to enhance the instability and direct
extrusion to either the apical or basal side of the monolayer.
INTRODUCTION
Foam geometry is ubiquitous in nature, appearing in contexts ranging from the large-scale structure of the cosmos to the froth
ona glass ofbeer.Epithelial sheets are an exampleofliving tissues with foamgeometry,referredto as “cell packinggeometry”
in biological terms. Epithelial sheets are monolayers of epithelial cells that have the ability to dynamically change their shape
and three-dimensional (3D) configuration, as is widely observed in morphogenesis, homeostasis, and carcinogenesis (1–4).
Epithelialcellsusuallypossessbothanapicalsurfaceandabasalsurface,whichhelptomaintaintheintegrityofthemonolayer.
Occasionally, a single cell loses its apical or basal surface and is extruded from the monolayer to the side opposite that of the
lost surface. The process of epithelial cell extrusion is also referred to as delamination or protrusion. Examples of epithelial
extrusion in vertebrates include the extrusion of apoptotic cells to the apical side of the monolayer as part of homeostasis
and the extrusion of pre-cancerous cells to the basal side of the monolayer as part of tumor growth and carcinogenesis (1).
Extrusionsto the basal side of the monolayeralso occur in epithelial-mesenchymaltransitions in vertebrates and invertebrates
(2, 3).
Manuscriptsubmitted to Biophysical Journal 1

Okuda and Fujimoto
Epithelial extrusion is a mechanical process of the epithelial monolayer. Upon extrusion, the epithelial structure transits
from a symmetric monolayer to a multilayer that is asymmetric relative to the apicobasal axis. Although many studies have
focusedon the molecular mechanismsof cell extrusions in variousphysiologicalcontexts, an understandingof the mechanical
basis of cell extrusion is still lacking. Recent studies showed that mechanical factors play key roles in the regulation of cell
extrusion, including actomyosin contractility and cadherin or integrin-mediated adhesion (5–11), cell crowding (12–14), and
the force balance on the apical junctional network (12, 15, 16). Some of the mechanical factors that regulate cell extrusion are
regulated by genetic programs; however, others are based on the geometry and stability of the cellular arrangement. During
extrusion, multiple mechanical forces driven by disparate underlying phenomena act together in 3D space. In order to gain a
consistent understanding of cell extrusion, it is necessary to clarify the contribution of each mechanical force within the 3D
multicellular geometry.
Thephysicalapproachto understandingcell extrusionis graduallygatheringattention.Forexample,Sawetal. modeledthe
epithelium as an active nematic liquid crystal and suggested that apoptotic cell extrusions are driven by topological defects of
cellular alignments (17). Remarkable progress has been made in the developmentof mechanical descriptions of epithelial cell
geometries (18–22). Pioneering work by Hannezo et al. explained buckling instabilities of the epithelial sheet on the basis of
the 3D force balance among apical, lateral, and basal components (18). That and other work used a mean-field approximation
of cell shapes (18–20, 22), which implicitly assumes that cells robustly maintain a homogeneous monolayer sheet structure.
On the other hand, Hannezo et al. explained how a cell embedded inside a tissue is moved to the surface of the tissue by
using an in-plane approximation to consider the dynamics of the apical shapes of single cells (21). Epithelial cell extrusion
occurs locally in epithelial sheets with apicobasalasymmetry(5–10). Therefore,a discrete and 3D descriptionof multicellular
mechanics (rather than a mean-field or in-plane description) is needed to elucidate its mechanical basis.
In this study, we present a description of epithelial extrusion using a 3D vertex model (23–25). First, we consider the
situation where an extruding cell and its neighbors possess homogeneous mechanical properties. We analytically calculate
energy landscapes and show that mechanical instability leading to cell extrusion is inherent in the 3D foam geometry of the
epithelial monolayer. Our results also clarify the individual effects of mechanical properties, cell density, and topology on
cell extrusion. Second, we consider the situation where active forces are generated on the apical, lateral, or basal region of an
extrudingcell accordingto intrinsic genetic programs.Our results show that the active forces provokethe inherent mechanical
instability of the monolayer to initiate the extrusion process as well as direct the extrusion to the apical or basal side of the
monolayer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A model of the 3D foam geometry of epithelial cell sheets
We created a geometric model of a cell sheet in which the cells are represented as polyhedrons with average volume V (> 0)
within a planar sheet with homogeneous thickness T (> 0) (Fig. 1a). We parameterizedT by introducing cell density into the
sheet ρ (> 0) (Fig. 1b). The effective area of each individual cell in the sheet is given by V T, so the in-plane cell density is
/
= 2
given as ρ T V. The in-plane cell density corresponds to the aspect ratio of the cells, which can be columnar (ρ V ),
−3
/ ≫
2 2
cuboidal (ρ V ), or squamous (ρ V ) in shape. For simplification, we assumed that the apical and basal surfaces are
−3 −3
≈ ≪
constrained in the plane and considered only the movements of a single center cell and its first neighbors within the sheet
(Fig. 1c,d), while keeping the other neighboring cells fixed in position. Under that approximation, the in-plane cell density ρ
implicitly reflects the effects of the surrounding cells (i.e., the mechanical environment).
We modeled the center cell as an n-sided regular frustum (n 3) with volume V, apical surface area A ( 0), and basal
a
≥ ≥
surface area A ( 0) (Fig. 1c). The set of n, V, A , and A uniquely determines the shape of the center cell. In that geometry,
b a b
≥
the center cell has either an apical surface, a basal surface, or both and is adjacent to n first-neighborcells with which it shares
lateral boundary faces. The n first-neighbor cells also lateral boundary faces with one another and are aligned radially around
the center cell. Additionally, we introduced several geometric parameters (Fig. 1d) including the height of the center cell H
(0 < h T), the apical perimeter of the center cell P ( 0), the total area of the n boundaryfaces between the center cell and
c
≤ ≥
its first neighboring cells A > 0), and total area of the n boundary faces between the first-neighbors cells A .
c p
(
A key part of our model is cell rearrangements in the out-of-plane direction (Fig. 1e), in which the surface area of the
= =
center cell shrinks to zero at either the apical surface (A 0) or the basal surface (A 0) and the cell is then extruded from
a b
the side of the monolayer opposite that of the lost surface. Such rearrangements are expressed by the degree of sharpness d
(Fig. 1d,e), which is defined as
T √A √A
= a b
d − . (1)
H √A + √A
a b
The parameter d characterizes the cell states continuously over topological rearrangements of the 3D cell configuration (Fig.
2 Manuscript submitted toBiophysical Journal

Mechanics ofEpithelial Extrusion
a c d
Side number (n) Perimeter (P )
Apical c
Area (A )
)T( ssenkcihTTH )H( thgieh lleC
a
Area (A )
p
Volume (V)
Area (A )
c
Area (A )
Basal
b
Regular pyramid Sharpness (d)
b
T woL T hgiH
In-plane density
(r = T/V)
Low r High r
e
Apical
Basal
d
Basal extrusion Apical convergence Dual sided Basal convergence Apical extrusion
(B: d < -1) (aC: d = -1) (D: -1 < d < 1) (bC: d = 1) (A: d > 1)
Figure 1: Mathematical model of the 3D foam geometry of epithelial sheets. a . Geometry of a cell sheet with thickness T. b .
In-plane cell density ρ introduced to replace T. ρ is defined as T V, where V is the average cell volume. c . Geometry of a
/
single center cell embedded in the sheet. The geometry is defined as a regular frustum, whose shape is uniquely determined
by the number of topological neighbors n, volume V, the apical surface area A , and the basal surface area A of the center
a b
cell. d . Geometric parameters of the center cell: H, height of the center cell; d, degree of sharpness defined by Eq. 1; P ,
c
apical perimeter of the center cell; A , total area of n boundary faces between the center cell and its first neighbors; A , total
c p
area of n boundary faces between first-neighbor cells. e . Physical states and topology of cells embedded in the planar sheet
characterized by sharpness d.
Manuscriptsubmitted to Biophysical Journal 3

Okuda and Fujimoto
a b c d
Apical force (k ) Basal force (k ) Lateral force (k) Perimeter easticity (k )
a b l a
Apical surface energy Basal surface energy Lateral boundary energy Apical perimeter constraint
a
Figure 2: Mechanical forces exerted on the center cell and its first neighbors, as described by Eq. 2. . Apical surface tension
b c
exerted on the apical area of each cell. . Basal surface energy exerted on the basal area of each cell. . Lateral boundary
d
energy exerted on the boundary areas among the cells. . Apical perimeter constraint exerted on the apical perimeter of each
cell.
=
1e). Thus, the rearrangements can be classified as basal extrusion (state B: d < 1), apical convergence (state aC: d 1),
− −
=
dual-sided (state D: 1 < d < 1), basal convergence(state bC: d 1), or apical extrusion (state A: d > 1). In the apical/basal
−
convergencestates (aC and bC), the cells locally formpseudostratifiedstructures,as observedin tissues such as neuroepithelia
(26, 27) and bronchial epithelia (28).
The mechanical energy of epithelial sheets as a function of 3D geometric parameters
We model the mechanical energy of the epithelial sheet as follows. First, we prescribed a fixed volume for each cell, because
the cell volumehas been shownto be almost constantduringmorphologicalchangesin several organisms(29, 30). Even under
the constraintsof constant cell volumeand planar-sheetgeometry,the cell-cell boundariescan move in principle,so d remains
variable. Epithelial sheets typically have a cortical actomyosin meshwork lining the apical surfaces of the cells (31), and actin
stress fibers and integrin on the basal cell surfaces to anchor the cells to the substrate (32). The cortical force is also exerted
on the lateral boundariesbetween cells (18, 24, 33). To model the forces generated by those molecules, we introduced tension
and adhesion onto the individual cell surfaces, depending on the apicobasal polarity (34). Those surface energies are usually
modeledas first-orderapproximationsproportionaltothe individualsurfaceareas (18, 24, 33). We thereforemadetheenergies
of the ith apical and basal surfaces proportional to the ith apical and basal surface areas (i.e.,κ Ai and κ Ai, respectively,
a a b b
where κ and κ are positive interfacialtensions; Fig.2a,b). Similarly , we made the energyof the boundarybetweentheith and
a b
jth cells proportional to the boundary area between those cells (i.e.,κ Aij, where κ is the interfacial tension; Fig.2c). Finally,
l l
we introduced contractile and adhesive forces along the apical perimeters of the cells to provide a force balance that acts to
maintain a preferred apical perimeter [(20, 31); Fig. 2d]. Specifically, we modeled the energy of the ith apical perimeter Pi
as an elastic energy around a preferred perimeter value P [i.e., k Pi P 2 , where k is a non-negative elastic modulus
eq a eq a
−
(20, 22)]. Assuming that the cells are arranged in a planar-sheet geometry, we set P so that the cells would take the shape of
eq
(cid:0) (cid:1)
a straight prism. The mechanical energy of the entire epithelial cell sheet is given as:
cells cells cells cells
2
U = κ Ai + κ Ai + κ Aij + k Pi P . (2)
e a a b b l a eq
−
i i ij i
Õ Õ Õ Õ (cid:16) (cid:17)
The second and third terms in Eq. 2 are negligible, because the total area of each apical and basal surface is conserved
across the entire sheet. On the other hand, the fourth and last terms are effective; that is, because the positions of the second
+
andnearest-neighborcells arefixed,we expandedthe fourthtermaroundthe centercell and first-neighborcells as κ A A
l c p
(Fig. 1d). Similarly, we expanded the last term as k 1+ 1 n 1 csc π n 2 P P 2, where 1 + 1 n 1 csc π n 2
a c eq
{ ( / )[ − ( / ))] }( − ) { ( / )[ − (cid:0)( / )] }(cid:1)
is a correction factor that reflects the effects of the center cell and first-neighbor cells (Eq. 23 in the Supplementary Material).
Thus, Eq. 2 can be rewritten as the mechanical energy of the center cell and first-neighbor cells in the planar sheet:
1 π 2
= + 2 + +
U k 1 1 csc P P κ A A . (3)
p a c eq l c p
n − n −
( )
h (cid:16) (cid:17)i
(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
Thepackinggeometryimposesthegeometricconstraintsonthephysicalparameters(i.e.,Eqs.11and12intheSupplemen-
=
tary Material). We therefore solved Eqs. 1, 11 and 12 simultaneously and replaced T with ρ, using ρ T V. The calculation
/
4 Manuscript submitted to Biophysical Journal

Mechanics ofEpithelial Extrusion
gave H, A , and A as functionsof ρ,V, and d (Eqs. 13, 14, and15in the SupplementaryMaterial).Thus,the set of parameters
a b
thatuniquelydeterminesthe shapeof thecenter cell was replacedwith n, ρ,V, and d. In addition,the geometricparameters P ,
c
A , and A in the energy function U were expressed as functions of n, ρ, V, and d (Eqs. 19, 20, and 21 in the Supplementary
c p
=
Material), givingU U n, ρ,V,d . Using the analytical expressions of U, we then calculated energy landscapes as functions
( )
of d underspecificvaluesofn, ρ,andV.Similarly,wealsoobtainedstatediagramsbycalculatingthevalueof d thatminimizes
U under arbitrary values of n, ρ, and V.
RESULTS
Mechanical instability is inherent in the 3D foam geometry of the cell sheet
Cellextrusionsoccasionallyoccurevenwithouttheactivegenerationofforcebytheextrudingcells,suggestingthatmechanical
instability inherent in the 3D geometry of the epithelial monolayer might be sufficient to drive cell extrusion. To analyze the
=
mechanical stability of a theoretical epithelial monolayer, we focused on the behavior of Eq. 3 around d 0.
Under physiological conditions, extrudingcells tend to lose their apicobasal polarity,and the adherens junction and apical
circumferential belt tend to disappear. The apical constraint (k ) expresses the summation of the mechanical forces generated
a
by the adherens junction and the apical circumferential belt.
=
By assuming k 0, we obtained the McLaurin expansion of Eq. 3 for d as
a
U = f κ + f κ d2 + O d4 as 1 < d < 1 , (4)
p 0 l 2 l
−
(cid:0) (cid:1)
where f and f are the zeroth and second-order coefficients of d as functions of n, ρ, and V. Equation 4 is an even function,
0 2
= = =
because Eq. 3 is symmetric about d 0 under k 0. The state at d 0 is stable when f > 0 and becomes unstable when
a 2
f < 0; that is, state bifurcations occur in a symmetry-breaking manner, depending on n, ρ, and V. The dependence on f is
2 2
transformed to dependence on ρ by the analytical expression of f (Eq. 24 in the Supplementary Material). Thus, the state at
2
=
d 0 is stable when ρ < ρ and unstable when ρ > ρ , where ρ is the critical density described as
* * *
1
π
3cos 3
= n
ρ 2 . (5)
* π
nV2 2sin 1
  (cid:0)n(cid:1) !
−
(cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:1) =
In Eq. 5, ρ is positive when n 6 and negative when n 7. In other words, the state at d 0 can be unstable when
*
≤ ≥
n 6, depending on ρ, whereas it is always stable and independent of ρ when n 7. Those results indicate an inherent
≤ ≥
mechanical instability in the 3D foam geometry of the cell-cell boundaries in the cellular sheet. Because of that inherent
instability, mechanical disturbances in the form of changes in cell topology or cell density within the monolayer can induce
extrusion without the application of any additional forces.
Cell density and topology regulate the mechanical instability within the epithelial sheet
To determine the effects of geometric and physical parameters on cell extrusion in more detail, we analyzed the energy
landscape of Eq. 3 for k , n, and ρ.
a
As expected from Eq. 4, the energy landscape of Eq. 3 led to mechanical instability and subsequent extrusion (Fig. 3). For
example, the decrease in k destabilized the dual-sided state (D) and stabilized the apical extrusion state (A) (Fig. 3a). Both a
a
decrease in n and an increase in ρ destabilized the dual-sided state (D) and stabilized the apical and basal extrusion states (A
and B) (Fig. 3b,c). The state diagram (Fig. 3d) indicates that the stability of the dual-sided state (D) and the apical extrusion
state (A) depends on all three parameters k , n, and ρ. For example, the dual-sided state (D) can be destabilized by a decrease
a
in k , a decrease in n, or an increase in ρ. On the other hand, the stability of basal extrusion state (B) depends on n and ρ
a
but not on k . That is, the number of neighbors n and the in-plane density ρ affects all regions of d (Fig. 3b-c), whereas the
a
apical perimeter elasticity k affects only a specific region of d (> 1) (Fig. 3a). The difference in the state stabilities causes
a
−
severalbistable states (D and B) and tristablestates (D,A, andB) (Fig. 3d). Froma quantitativepointof view,the apicaland/or
extrusion states (A and B) can be stabilized for n 5 and ρ & 1.3V 2 (Fig. 3d). Specifically, the transition boundarybetween
−3
≤
=
stable and unstable for the dual-sided state (D) obeyedthe theoretical boundaryof Eq. 5 (dashed line at k 0 in Fig. 3d). The
a
dependence on k , n and ρ indicates that the 3D foam geometry of the cellular sheet is inherently unstable, and cells maintain
a
the monolayer integrity by regulating their density, topology, and apicobasal polarity.
The state diagram indicates that the apical and basal extrusion states (A and B) became stabilized when 5 n 4. Under
≥ ≥
those conditions, the cells formed rosette-like structures (illustrated in Fig. 3d). The rosette-like structures obtained in the
model (Fig. 4c) are also observed in extruding cells in several physiological contexts (7, 12). Rosette structures have often
Manuscriptsubmitted to Biophysical Journal 5

Okuda and Fujimoto
a Basal Apical
7
k =1.0
a d
ygrenEygrenEygrenE
4 k =0.5 P
a
D D,A,B
etadargeD
k =0 TThheeoorryy
a
D: d ~ 0
1
AA,,BB
n = 6,
b
0 r = 4.5v-2/3
n=3
2
)k/
la
n=6
k( yticitsale retemirep lacipA D
0
DP,,BB
n=9 DD,,AA,,BB A: d > 1
0.25 AA,,BB
-2
Basal Apical
c 10
6
9
5 8 n)
r=0.5v-2/3 ber (
D 7 B: d < -1
4 6 m
nu n = 5,
DD,,BB 5
de 
3 r=1.5v-2/3 4 r = 4.5v-2/3
DD,,AA,,BB Si
3
2 0.5 AA,,BB
r=4.5v-2/3
0.1 0.2 0.5 1 2 5 10
1
In-plane density (rv2/3)
Basal Apical
0
-2 -1 0 1 2
Sharpness (d)
Figure 3: Mechanical stability of a homogeneous epithelial sheet with respect to apical elasticity, cell density, and topology.
a –c . Energy landscapes of Eq. 3 with respect to the apical perimeter elasticity k , the number of sides n, and the in-plane
a
cell density ρ. Triangles (N) indicate energy minima. Physical parameters were set to n = 5 and ρ = 3V 2 in a , k = 0 and
−3 a
ρ = 2.0V 2 in b , and k = 0 and n = 5 in c . In a–c, apical (> 1) and basal (< 1) extrusion states are colored red and
−3 a
−
blue, respectively. d . State diagram of Eq. 3 with respect to the number of sides n, the in-plane cell density ρ, and the apical
perimeterconstraint k . The cell states are colorcoded: white unistablestate (D); purple,bistable states (A) and (B); light blue,
a
bistable states (D) and (B); light purple, tristable states (D), (A), and (B). The states (D), (A), and (B) are identical to those in
Fig. 1e. The dashed line indicates the theoretical transition boundary between stable and unstable regions of dual-sided state
(D), as described by Eq. 5.
6 Manuscript submitted toBiophysical Journal

| P            |
| D D,A,B      |
| TThheeoorr   |
| AA,,BB       |
|:-------------|
| D            |
| DP,,BB       |
| DD,,AA,,BB   |
| AA,,BB       |

Mechanics ofEpithelial Extrusion
c
a
TThheeoorryy
Cell-intrinsic lateral force (k )
l+
D
tcartnoCerehdA AA,,BB
D,A,B
+0.5
P
Cell-intrinsic lateral  )k/k( ecrof laretal cisnirtni-lleC l+l
boundary energy D D,A,B
TThheeoorryy
b AA,,BB
tcartnoCerehdA
4 kk ==  00..55kk
ll++ ll 0
2 10
ygrenE kk ==  00 kk 9
ll++ l+l+ 8 n)
0 7 er (
D
b
6 m
u
kk ==  --00..55kk 5 e n
-2 ll++ ll 4 d
Si
Basal Apical 3
-0.5
-2 -1 0 1 2 0.1 0.2 0.5 1 2 5 10
Sharpness (d) In-plane density (rv2/3)
a
Figure 4: Effects of active forces exerted on lateral cell-cell boundaries of extruding cells. . Force specifically generated on
b
the lateral boundary areas between the center cell and its first neighbors. . Energy landscape of Eq. 6 with respect to the
active lateral force κ . Triangles (N) indicate energy minimum points. c . State diagram of Eq. 6 with respect to the number
l+
of sides n, the in-plane cell density ρ, and the active lateral force κ . The color coding in b and c is identical to that in Fig.
l+
3a and 3d, respectively. The dashed lines indicate the theoretical transition boundaries between stable and unstable regions of
= = = 2
2 dual-sided state (D), as described by Eq. 7. The physical parameters were set to k 0, n 6, and ρ 2.5V in a, and
a −3
=
k 0 in b.
a
been observed on the apical side of epithelial monolayers (35); however, our model suggests that they can also form on the
basal surface. The lack of prior observations of rosette-like structures on the basal surface might be due to the difficulty in
observing cell-cell boundaries on the basal side of live epithelial monolayers.
Active generation of forces on cell-cell boundaries provokes extrusion
Extrudingcells occasionally generate active forces, making the mechanical properties heterogeneouswithin the cellular sheet.
For example, actomyosin accumulates along the apicobasal axis and generates contractile force, as observed in invertebrate
apoptosis (9), morphogenesis (36), and vertebrate cell extrusion (10). Because mechanical instability is inherent in the force
balance on cell-cell boundaries, the active generation of force on those boundaries might enhance the instability and provoke
extrusion.
We assumed that single cells generateforces onthe boundarieswith their neighbors(Fig. 4a). We describedthose forcesas
a lateral energy κ A , proportionalto the lateral boundaryarea between the center cell and its first neighbors A . The variable
l+ c c
κ indicates the relative difference between the lateral forces exerted on A and those exerted on A . Positive and negative κ
l+ c p l+
values represent contractile and adhesive forces, respectively. Thus, Eq. 2 can be rewritten as
= +
U U κ A . (6)
l p l+ c
=
Toanalyze the effects of κ on cell extrusions,we focusedon d 1 and calculatedthe Mclaurinseries of Eq. 6 at k 0.
l+ a
| | ≪
Manuscriptsubmitted to Biophysical Journal 7

| None   | D            |
|        | AA,,BB       |
|:-------|:-------------|
|        | P            |
|        | D D,A,B      |
|        | TThheeoorryy |
|        | AA,,BB       |

Okuda and Fujimoto
a b
Cell-intrinsic apical force (l ) Cell-intrinsic basal force (k )
a+ b+
Cell-intrinsic apical  Cell-intrinsic basal 
edge energy surface energy
c d
k = 0, k = 0 k = 0, l = 0
l+ b+ l+ a+
Basal Apical Basal Apical
8
kk ==  ++00..88kk 6
==  ++00..88kkvv11//33 Contract Contract bb++ ll
ll
aa++ ll
4 4
ll kk
ygrenE aa++ bb++ ygrenE
l = 0
k = 0 2
0 a+ b+
Adhere Adhere
= -0.8kv1/3
l
a+ l 0
kk ==  --00..88kk
-4 bb++ ll
-2 -1 0 1 2 -2 -1 0 1 2
aC: d = -1 Sharpness (d) Sharpness (d)
a
Figure 5: Individualeffects of active forces exerted on the apical and basal sides of extrudingcells. . Active force specifically
b c d
exerted on the apical perimeter of the center cell. . Active force specifically exerted on the basal area of the center cell. – .
Energy landscapes of Eq. 8 with respect to apical λ and basal κ forces, respectively. Triangles (N) indicate energy minima.
a+ b+
= = = 2
Physical parameters were set to k 0, n 6, and ρ 1.5V .
a −3
Similarly to Eq. 5, the analytical calculation gave the critical density ρ , described as
l+*
1
3
π
3cos
= n
ρ 2 , (7)
l+*
π κ
nV2 2sin (cid:0) (cid:1) l
© n − κ l+κ l+ ª
  ®
(cid:16) (cid:17)
  (cid:0) (cid:1) ®
= =
where the state at d 0 is stable when ρ < ρ and unstable when ρ > ρ . Under the condition with k 0, because Eq. 6
l+* l+* a
« ¬ =
is an even function of d, state bifurcations occur in a symmetry-breaking manner at ρ ρ , depending on n, ρ, V, and the
l+*
force balance between κ and κ .
l l+
Toanalyzecell behaviorsacross a widerangeof d, wecalculatedenergylandscapesandstate diagramsusingEq. 6(Fig.4).
The energy landscapes demonstratedthat, similarly to increases in ρ, the generation of lateral force induces instability leading
to extrusion (Fig. 4b). The dependencies of the stability of dual-sided state (D) on ρ, n, and κ (Fig. 4c) are quantitatively
l+
consistent with the theoretical boundaries of Eq. 7. The state diagrams obtained from Eq. 6 indicate that lateral constriction
(κ > 0) causes extrusion even when n 7, whereas lateral adhesion (κ < 0) suppresses extrusion even when n 6 (Fig.
l+ l+
≥ ≤
4c). Thus, active lateral constriction lead to cell extrusion independently of the foam geometry of the epithelial sheet.
Asymmetrical force generation directs extrusion to the apical or basal side of the cellular sheet
We investigated the individual roles of forces generated on the apical and basal sides of an extruding cell. Under physiological
conditions, the apical and basal regions of an extruding cell generate forces such as myosin-inducedcontraction and cadherin-
mediated or integrin-mediatedadhesion (5–7, 9, 10). The geometric regions where the forces are exerted are asymmetric: the
apical forces are exerted on the apical perimeter, whereas the basal forces are exerted on the whole basal surface.
We considered the additional apical and basal energies separately by making the additional apical energy, λ P , propor-
a+ c
tional to the apical junction length P (Fig. 5a) and the additional basal energy, κ A , proportional to the basal surface area
c b+ c
8 Manuscript submitted toBiophysical Journal

Mechanics ofEpithelial Extrusion
a b c
 /k = -0.5  /k = 0  /k = +0.5
k k k
l+ l l+ l l+ l
2
)k/ k( ecrof lasab cisnirtni-lleC D,aC D,aC D,aC
l+bygrenE
D
D
D AA
AA
AA
aC
aC
0 aC D,A
D,A
DD,,BB
AA,,BB
AA,,BB DD,,BB
AA,,BB DD,,BB
BB BB BB
DD,,AA,,BB DD,,AA,,BB DD,,AA,,BB
-2
-1 0 1 -1 0 1 -1 0 1
Cell-intrinsic apical force (l  /kv1/3) Cell-intrinsic apical force (l  /kv1/3) Cell-intrinsic apical force (l  /kv1/3)
a+ l a+ l a+ l
d e
k = 0, k = 0 k = 0, l = 0
l+ b+ l+ a+
l = 1.6kv1/3 l = 0.8kv1/3 k = 8k
1.2 a+ l a+ l b+ l 1.2
k = 4k
b+ l
= 0.4kv1/3
1.1 l 1.1
a+ l
ygrenE
k = 2k
b+ l
1.0 1.0
l = 0
a+ k = 0
Basal b+ Apical
0.9 0.9
-1.4 -1.0 -0.6 0.6 1.0 1.4
aC: d = -1 Sharpness (d Sharpness (d
) )
a c
Figure6: Combinedeffectsof activeforcesexertedonthe apical,basal,andlateral sides ofextrudingcells. – .State diagrams
= =
of Eq. 8 with respect to apical λ , basal κ , and lateral κ forces. Physical parameters were set to k 0, n 6, and
a+ b+ l+ a
= 2
ρ 1.5V . The cell states are color coded: white, unistable state (D); red, unistable state (A); blue unistable state (B); light
−3
gray, unistable state (aC); light red, bistable state (D, A); light blue, bistable state (D, B); dark gray, bistable state (D, aC);
purple, bistable state (A, B); light purple, tristable state (D, A, B). The abbreviations of states (D), (A), (B), and (aC) are
identical to those in Fig. 1e. d –e . Energy landscapes of Eq. 8 with respect to the apical energy λ and κ , respectively.
a+ b+
Triangles (N) indicate energy minima. Physical parameters were set to n = 6, ρ = 1.5V 2 , and κ = 0.
−3 l+
A (Fig. 5b). Thus, Eq. 6 could be rewritten as
b
= + +
U U λ P κ A . (8)
a l a+ c b+ b
To understand roles of the apical and basal forces cell extrusion, we calculated energy landscapes using Eq. 8. The
landscapes demonstrated that apical and basal adhesions (λ < 0, κ < 0) stabilized the apical and basal extrusion states (A
a+ b+
and B), respectively (Fig. 5c,d). Basal constriction (κ > 0) maintained the dual-sided state (D), whereas apical constriction
b+
(λ > 0) stabilized the apical convergencestate (aC), allowing the cells to stably maintain a pseudostratified structure. Those
a+
results indicate that the force regulation in apicobasal regions determines the direction of cell extrusion to either the apical
side or the basal side of the cellular sheet.
Underphysiologicalconditions,the active forces on the apical, lateral, and basal regionsof the cells in epithelial sheets are
often intertwined. For example, the expression of Rho family proteins that downregulateactomyosinactivity is deterioratedin
human tumors (37, 38), upsetting the balance among the apical, basal, and lateral forces. To understand the combined effects
of the separate active forces, we calculated state diagrams using Eq. 8. The state diagrams demonstrated that the combination
of active apical, basal, and lateral forces induces several bifurcations of the stable cell states [e.g., the bistable states (A, B),
(D, A), (D, B), and (D, aC) in Fig. 6]. Overall, as κ increased, the stable region of the dual-sided state (D) gradually shrunk
l+
Manuscriptsubmitted to Biophysical Journal 9

Okuda and Fujimoto
(white region in Fig. 6a–c). A decrease in either the apical λ force or the basal κ force directed extrusion selectively to the
a+ b+
apical (A) or basal (B) side, respectively (Fig. 6a–c).
The dependence of cell states on the apical (λ ) and basal (κ ) forces was asymmetric (Fig. 6); that is, the diagrams
a+ b+
involved the bistable state (D, aC) but not the bistable state (D, bC). The asymmetry emerges from the difference in the
geometric regions where the apical and basal forces are exerted. The geometric difference leads to a difference in stable cell
states via mechanical energy. In order to clarify the effects of the apical and basal forces on the mechanical instability of the
= =
apical and basal convergence states, we focused on the behaviors of Eq. 8 around d 1 and d 1. Because the apical
−
and basal forces affect cell states under conditions where d 1 and d 1, respectively, we narrowed the range of d to
≥ − ≤
= =
1 d 1. In addition, because Eq. 8 is discontinuous at d 1 and d 1, we considered the behaviors around the limits
− ≤ +≤ −
= = =
d 1 and d 1 under k 0 and κ 0. In the absence of the basal force (κ 0), the Taylor series of Eq. 8 around
− a l+ b+
=→ −+ →
d 1 is written as
−
π
3ntan
= + + n + + + 2
U κ g κ g λ d 1 O d 1 as 1 < d < 1 . (9)
a l 0 l 1 a+
s ρ ( ) [ ] −
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
© ª
In Eq. 9, g , g , and g are the zerot h, first-order, and secon®d-order coefficients of the lateral energy (κ ) as functions of n, ρ,
0 1 2 l
= =
and V. In the absence of the apical fo«rce (λ 0), the Taylo¬r series of Eq. 8 around d 1 is written as
a+ −
3κ
b+
= + + + 2 + 3
U κ h κ h d 1 κ h d 1 O d 1 as 1 < d < 1 . (10)
a l 0 l 1 l 2
( − ) 4ρ ( − ) [ − ] −
  !
(cid:16) (cid:17)
In Eq. 10, h , h , and h are the zeroth, first-order, and second-ordercoefficients of the lateral energy (κ ) as functions of n, ρ,
0 1 2 l
andV. Equations 9 and 10 show the different dependencesof the energy functions on λ and κ . Because the lowest order of
a+ b+
= + =
the apical energy (λ ) around d 1 is linear and similar to that of κ , the stability of the apical convergencestate (d 1)
a+ l
− −
=
strongly depends on λ . On the other hand, because the lowest-order term of the basal energy (κ ) around d 1 is higher
a+ b+ −
=
than that of κ , the stability at the basal convergence state (d 1) slightly depends on κ . These results indicate that even
l b+
when the convergencestates are not stable under the influence of the lateral energy (κ ), the apical energy (λ ) has a potential
l a+
=
to stabilize the apical convergencestate (d 1), as observed in Fig. 6. Therefore,the asymmetric localization of mechanical
−
factors in the subcellular level leads to forming the asymmetric layer structures of epithelial sheets in the apicobasal axis.
DISCUSSION
We described the discrete and 3D multicellular mechanics of epithelial sheets and analytically demonstrated that there is
inherent instability in the 3D foam geometry of those structures that is sufficient to drive cell extrusion. Our results indicate
that the maintenance of cellular monolayers requires a proper 3D cell geometry and force balance, which are ignored in most
2D models (18–20, 22). Our results suggest that the stability of cellular monolayers depends on the cell geometry and the
generation of various active forces under in vivo and in vitro physiological conditions, indicating a deep interdependence
among the 3D foam geometry, cellular force generation, and multicellular integrity in epithelia. Furthermore, our results
suggest that a mechanical instability is the fundamental mechanism that drives and determines the direction of cell extrusions.
Ourmodelalsoexplainsvariousepithelialgeometriessuchas rosettestructuresandpseudostratifiedstructures,suggestingthat
it might be applicable to other phenomena such as epithelial homeostasis (4) and the formation of layered structures (26–28).
The simple condition in Fig. 3 corresponds to the physiological situation where an extruding cell and its neighbors possess
homogeneous mechanical properties. The resulting dependences on k , n, and ρ agree well with experimental observations,
a
suggesting that mechanical instability is a determinant of the 3D foam geometry of epithelial sheets. For example, epithelial
=
sheets usually have a hexagonal packing geometry n 6) and contain few cells with n 3 (20, 39). Upon extrusion in vivo,
≈
most cells reduce their number of topological neighbors from n 6 to n 3 (12). That dependence on n under physiological
≈ ≈
conditions is qualitatively consistent with the dependence of the stability of the dual-sided state (D) on n in our model (Fig.
3b,d). Furthermore, under physiological conditions, extrusion is accompanied by an increase in cell density (12–14), which
is qualitatively consistent with the dependence of the stability of the dual-sided state (D) on ρ in our model (Fig. 3b,d). The
parameter ranges of n and ρ surveyed in our study approximately correspond to those observed in various physiological
contexts. The transition from the dual-sided state to the extrusion state under physiological conditions is accompanied by a
loss of apicobasal cell polarity (5, 6), which corresponds to a decrease in k in our model (Fig. 3d). The many agreements
a
between our model and observations in living systems suggest that the relationship between mechanical instability and cell
extrusions that exists in our model also exists in living systems.
TheconditionsmodeledinFigs.4–6correspondtothesituationwhereanextrudingcellactivelygeneratesforcesaccording
to an intrinsic genetic program.The resulting dependences on κ , λ correspond to a wide range of physiologicalconditions.
l+ a+
10 Manuscriptsubmitted to Biophysical Journal

Mechanics ofEpithelial Extrusion
For example, apoptotic cells accumulate actomyosin along the apicobasal (lateral) axis (9), implying that they actively cause
lateral constriction (positive κ ) to help drive the extrusion process (Fig. 4). Similar actomyosin accumulation is observed
l+
in several other physiological contexts (10, 36). Apoptotic cells also form an actomyosin ring along the boundary with their
neighbors(5–7, 9, 10), implying that they actively cause constriction on either the apical side or the basal side (positive λ or
a+
positive κ ),thus determiningthe directionofextrusion(Figs.5–6). E-cadherinknockdownin normalcells thatsurroundRas-
b+
positive cells reduces the frequency of apical extrusion of the Ras-positive cells while promoting basal protrusion formation
and invasion (8). Because cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion is coupled to actin accumulation along adherens junctions,
the knockdown of E-cadherin reduces the apical contractility of the normal cells surrounding the Ras-positive cells, which
corresponds to the relative increase in the apical contractility of the center cell (i.e., λ ) in our model (Fig. 6). The initial
a+
state of basal cell invasion, corresponding to the basal extrusion state (B) in our model, is accompanied by integrin-mediated
adhesion (11), which corresponds to a relative increase in the basal adhesion of the center cell (i.e., decrease in κ ) in our
b+
model (Fig. 6). Thus, the effects of apical, lateral, and basal forces (λ , κ , and κ in Figs. 4–6) in our model are consistent
a+ l+ b+
with local accumulations of mechanical factors such as actomyosin, cadherin, and integrin in living systems. Those results
indicate that cells can exert forces within epithelial sheets in order to utilize the mechanical instability inherent in the 3D
foam geometry of the monolayer. Therefore, the spatial distributions of the molecules that produce those forces should be
rigorously regulated at the subcellular level. Furthermore, it is possible that defects in those distributions lead to pathologies
related to epithelial integrity and extrusion. Although our model recapitulates physiological processes, it is limited by some
approximations.
First, the geometry of the cells in the model is simplified as a flat sheet, whereas epithelial sheets can be curved by forces
that produce invaginationor branching(40, 41). Such curvatures might affect the mechanical stability of epithelial sheets. For
example, a recent study suggested that the curvatureof an epithelial sheet affects whether a given cell is extruded to the apical
or the basal side (42). Another recent study suggested that the cell geometry in curved sheets can vary more widely than
that in flat sheets (40). Moreover, from a topological point of view, it is known that pentagon-like and heptagon-like defects
accumulatein regionswith positive andnegativecurvatures,respectively(43). Althoughit is challengingto analyzethe effects
of curvatures on the mechanical stability of epithelial sheets, it might be possible to conduct such an analysis by regarding
the sheet curvature as a constraint condition. A second approximation that limits our model is that individual cell shapes are
simplified as polyhedrons with flat surfaces, whereas actual cell surfaces can be curved. The same simplification is employed
in vertex models, which nevertheless have succeeded in recapitulating various developmental processes (44). We applied our
model to qualitatively analyze cell extrusions under conditionsrepresenting variousphysiologicalconditions (Fig. 3–6). More
quantitative analyses might be made possible by taking into account changes in cell surface curvatures. A third limitation of
our model is that the mechanical energies of the apical and basal surfaces are simply expressed as linear terms of the surface
areas, and their contributionsto the total energyin the flat cellular sheet are ignored.Althoughsimple functionsare often used
in the modeling of mechanical cell behaviors (23, 24, 45), higher-order terms might also affect the instability of cell sheet,
which could be addressed by modifying the mechanical energy function. A fourth limitation of our model is that it focuses
on steady states of single-cell behavior. Under physiological conditions, there are temporal changes in active force generation
during the extrusion process (8, 10, 11). Moreover, cell extrusions can sometimes be coupled to surrounding cell behaviors
such as proliferation, apoptosis, and motility or migration. Such dynamic and multicellular behaviors can be modeled by
computational simulations using 3D vertex models (23, 24, 45, 46), which have the ability to link the basic insights gained
through our model to specific physiological contexts. Despite its limitations, our model provides a guide to understanding the
wide range of epithelial physiology that occurs in morphogenesis, homeostasis, and carcinogenesis.
CONCLUSION
We presented a theoretical model that describes the mechanical stability of cellular monolayers. The model shows that the
cellularmonolayerhasinherentmechanicalinstabilitythatis sufficienttocausecellextrusionwithoutanyadditionalprovoking
factors,even whenthe cells havehomogenousmechanicalproperties.Analytical calculationsshow that the instability depends
on the cell density, topology,and mechanical properties within the monolayer.The active generationof forces by an extruding
cell can provoke extrusion and direct the extrusion to the apical or basal side of the monolayer,suggesting that cells utilize the
mechanical instability of the epithelial geometry in order to regulate extrusion.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
S.O. conceivedof the study,carried out the calculations, and wrote the manuscript.K.F. providedcritical feedbackand helped
to write the manuscript.
Manuscript submitted to Biophysical Journal 11

Okuda and Fujimoto
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Dr. Tetsuya Hiraiwa at the University of Tokyo,Dr. Romain Levayerat Institut Pasteur, Dr. Yosuke Ogura at RIKEN,
Dr. Katsuyoshi Matsushita at Osaka University, and Mr. Koki Nunota at Kanazawa University for discussions. S.O. thanks
his colleagues in the laboratory of Prof. Mototsugu Eiraku at Kyoto University for discussions. This work was supported by
the JST CREST Grant No. JPMJCR1921 (S.O.), JST PRESTO Grant No. JPMJPR16F3 (S.O.), JSPS KAKENHI Grant No.
17KT0021 (S.O.), 17H02939 (S.O.), 17H05619 (K.F.), and 19H04777 (S.O.), the Uehara Memorial Foundation (S.O.), and
by the World Premier International Research Center Initiative (WPI), MEXT, Japan (S.O.).
REFERENCES
1. Slattum, G. M., and J. Rosenblatt, 2014. Tumourcell invasion:an emergingrole forbasal epithelial cell extrusion. Nature
Reviews Cancer 14:495.
2. Lee, J. M., S. Dedhar, R. Kalluri, and E. W. Thompson, 2006. The epithelial–mesenchymal transition: new insights in
signaling, development, and disease. Journal of Cell Biology 172:973–981.
3. Thiery, J. P., H. Acloque, R. Y. Huang, and M. A. Nieto, 2009. Epithelial-mesenchymal transitions in development and
disease. Cell 139:871–890.
4. Macara, I. G., R. Guyer, G. Richardson, Y. Huo, and S. M. Ahmed, 2014. Epithelial homeostasis. Current Biology
24:R815–R825.
5. Katoh,H., andY. Fujita, 2012. Epithelialhomeostasis:eliminationbylive cell extrusion. CurrentBiology22:R453–R455.
6. Gudipaty, S. A., and J. Rosenblatt, 2017. Epithelial cell extrusion: Pathways and pathologies. In Seminars in cell &
developmental biology. Elsevier, volume 67, 132–140.
7. Rosenblatt, J., M. C. Raff, and L. P.Cramer,2001. An epithelialcell destinedforapoptosissignals its neighborsto extrude
it by an actin-and myosin-dependentmechanism. Current Biology 11:1847–1857.
8. Hogan, C., S. Dupré-Crochet,M. Norman, M. Kajita, C. Zimmermann,A. E. Pelling, E. Piddini, L. A. Baena-López, J.-P.
Vincent, Y. Itoh, et al., 2009. Characterization of the interface between normal and transformed epithelial cells. Nature
Cell Biology 11:460.
9. Monier, B., M. Gettings, G. Gay, T. Mangeat, S. Schott, A. Guarner, and M. Suzanne, 2015. Apico-basal forces exerted
by apoptotic cells drive epithelium folding. Nature 518:245–248.
10. Kajita, M., K. Sugimura, A. Ohoka, J. Burden, H. Suganuma, M. Ikegawa, T. Shimada, T. Kitamura, M. Shindoh,
S. Ishikawa, et al., 2014. Filamin acts as a key regulator in epithelial defence against transformed cells. Nature
Communications 5:4428.
11. Friedl, P., and K. Wolf, 2003. Tumour-cell invasion and migration: diversity and escape mechanisms. Nature Reviews
Cancer 3:362.
12. Marinari, E., A. Mehonic, S. Curran, J. Gale, T. Duke, and B. Baum, 2012. Live-cell delamination counterbalances
epithelial growth to limit tissue overcrowding. Nature 484:542.
13. Eisenhoffer, G. T., P. D. Loftus, M. Yoshigi, H. Otsuna, C.-B. Chien, P. A. Morcos, and J. Rosenblatt, 2012. Crowding
induces live cell extrusion to maintain homeostatic cell numbers in epithelia. Nature 484:546.
14. Levayer,R.,C.Dupont,andE.Moreno,2016. Tissuecrowdinginducescaspase-dependentcompetitionforspace. Current
Biology 26:670–677.
15. Tsuboi, A., S. Ohsawa, D. Umetsu, Y. Sando, E. Kuranaga, T. Igaki, and K. Fujimoto, 2018. Competition for Space Is
Controlled by Apoptosis-InducedChange of Local Epithelial Topology. Current Biology .
16. Ohsawa, S., J. Vaughen, and T. Igaki, 2018. Cell extrusion: a stress-responsive force for good or evil in epithelial
homeostasis. Developmental cell 44:284–296.
17. Saw, T. B., A. Doostmohammadi,V. Nier, L. Kocgozlu, S. Thampi, Y. Toyama, P. Marcq, C. T. Lim, J. M. Yeomans, and
B. Ladoux, 2017. Topological defects in epithelia govern cell death and extrusion. Nature 544:212.
12 Manuscriptsubmitted to Biophysical Journal

Mechanics ofEpithelial Extrusion
18. Hannezo, E., J. Prost, and J.-F. Joanny,2014. Theory of epithelial sheet morphologyin three dimensions. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 111:27–32.
19. Honda,H., Y. Ogita, S. Higuchi,and K. Kani, 1982. Cell movementsin a living mammaliantissue: long-termobservation
of individual cells in wounded corneal endothelia of cats. Journal of Morphology 174:25–39.
20. Farhadifar, R., J.-C. Röper, B. Aigouy, S. Eaton, and F. Jülicher, 2007. The influence of cell mechanics, cell-cell
interactions, and proliferation on epithelial packing. Current Biology 17:2095–2104.
21. Sedzinski, J., E. Hannezo, F. Tu, M. Biro, and J. B. Wallingford, 2016. Emergence of an apical epithelial cell surface in
vivo. Developmental Cell 36:24–35.
22. Misra,M.,B.Audoly,I.G.Kevrekidis,andS.Y.Shvartsman,2016. Shapetransformationsofepithelialshells. Biophysical
journal 110:1670–1678.
23. Honda,H., M. Tanemura,and T. Nagai, 2004. A three-dimensionalvertex dynamics cell model of space-filling polyhedra
simulating cell behavior in a cell aggregate. Journal of Theoretical Biology 226:439–453.
24. Okuda, S., Y. Inoue, M. Eiraku, Y. Sasai, and T. Adachi, 2013. Reversible network reconnection model for simulating
large deformation in dynamic tissue morphogenesis. Biomechanics and Modeling in Mechanobiology12:627–644.
25. Hashimoto, A., A. Nagao, and S. Okuda, 2018. Topological graph description of multicellular dynamics based on vertex
model. Journal of Theoretical Biology 437:187–201.
26. Miyata, T., A. Kawaguchi, H. Okano, and M. Ogawa, 2001. Asymmetric inheritance of radial glial fibers by cortical
neurons. Neuron 31:727–741.
27. Haubensak, W., A. Attardo, W. Denk, and W. B. Huttner, 2004. Neurons arise in the basal neuroepithelium of the early
mammaliantelencephalon:amajorsiteofneurogenesis. ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciences101:3196–3201.
28. Rackley, C. R., and B. R. Stripp, 2012. Building and maintaining the epithelium of the lung. The Journal of Clinical
Investigation 122:2724–2730.
29. Weber, K. L., R. S. Fischer, and V. M. Fowler, 2007. Tmod3 regulates polarized epithelial cell morphology. Journal of
Cell Science 120:3625–3632.
30. Gelbart, M. A., B. He, A. C. Martin, S. Y. Thiberge, E. F. Wieschaus, and M. Kaschube, 2012. Volume conservation
principle involved in cell lengthening and nucleus movement during tissue morphogenesis. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 109:19298–19303.
31. Lecuit, T., and P.-F. Lenne,2007. Cell surfacemechanicsand the controlof cell shape, tissue patterns and morphogenesis.
Nature reviews Molecular cell biology 8:633.
32. Berrier, A. L., and K. M. Yamada, 2007. Cell–matrix adhesion. Journal of Cellular Physiology 213:565–573.
33. Bielmeier, C., S. Alt, V. Weichselberger, M. La Fortezza, H. Harz, F. Jülicher, G. Salbreux, and A.-K. Classen, 2016.
Interface contractility between differently fated cells drives cell elimination and cyst formation. Current Biology 26:563–
574.
34. Dawes-Hoang, R. E., K. M. Parmar, A. E. Christiansen, C. B. Phelps, A. H. Brand, and E. F. Wieschaus, 2005. Folded
gastrulation, cell shape change and the control of myosin localization. Development 132:4165–4178.
35. Harding, M. J., H. F. McGraw, and A. Nechiporuk, 2014. The roles and regulation of multicellular rosette structures
during morphogenesis. Development 141:2549–2558.
36. Sui, L., S. Alt, M. Weigert, N. Dye, S. Eaton, F. Jug, E. W. Myers, F. Jülicher, G. Salbreux, and C. Dahmann, 2018.
Differential lateral and basal tension drive folding of Drosophila wing discs through two distinct mechanisms. Nature
Communications 9:4620.
37. del Pulgar,T. G., S. A. Benitah,P. F. Valerón,C. Espina, andJ. C. Lacal, 2005. Rho GTPase expressionin tumourigenesis:
evidence for a significant link. Bioessays 27:602–613.
Manuscript submitted to Biophysical Journal 13

Okuda and Fujimoto
38. Abraham, M. T., M. A. Kuriakose, P. G. Sacks, H. Yee, L. Chiriboga, E. L. Bearer, and M. D. Delacure, 2001. Motility-
related proteins as markers for head and neck squamous cell cancer. The Laryngoscope 111:1285–1289.
39. Gibson,M.C.,A.B.Patel,R.Nagpal,andN.Perrimon,2006. Theemergenceofgeometricorderinproliferatingmetazoan
epithelia. Nature 442:1038.
40. Gómez-Gálvez, P., P. Vicente-Munuera, A. Tagua, C. Forja, A. M. Castro, M. Letrán, A. Valencia-Expósito, C. Grima,
M. Bermúdez-Gallardo,Ó. Serrano-Pérez-Higueras,et al., 2018. Scutoidsarea geometricalsolutiontothree-dimensional
packing of epithelia. Nature communications 9:2960.
41. Kim, H. Y., V. D. Varner, and C. M. Nelson, 2013. Apical constriction initiates new bud formation during monopodial
branching of the embryonic chicken lung. Development 140:3146–3155.
42. Maechler, F. A., C. Allier, A. Roux, and C. Tomba, 2019. Curvature-dependentconstraints drive remodeling of epithelia.
J Cell Sci 132:jcs222372.
43. Irvine, W. T., V. Vitelli, and P. M. Chaikin, 2010. Pleats in crystals on curved surfaces. Nature 468:947.
44. Fletcher, A. G., M. Osterfield, R. E. Baker, and S. Y. Shvartsman, 2014. Vertex models of epithelial morphogenesis.
Biophysical journal 106:2291–2304.
45. Okuda, S., N. Takata, Y. Hasegawa, M. Kawada, Y. Inoue, T. Adachi, Y. Sasai, and M. Eiraku, 2018. Strain-triggered
mechanical feedback in self-organizing optic-cup morphogenesis. Science advances 4:eaau1354.
46. Messal, H. A., S. Alt, R. M. Ferreira, C. Gribben,V. M.-Y. Wang, C. G. Cotoi, G. Salbreux, and A. Behrens, 2019. Tissue
curvature and apicobasal mechanical tension imbalance instruct cancer morphogenesis. Nature 566:126.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Derivation of the mechanical energy functions
When the center cell shape is expressed as a regular frustum, it is uniquely determined by a set of n, V, A , and A (Fig. 1c).
a b
The volume of the frustum is calculated as
H A + √A A + A
a a b b
=
V . (11)
(cid:16) 3 (cid:17)
The topology of the center cell depending on d (Fig. 1e) gives
=
A 0 when d 1
a
≤ −
=
H T when 1 d 1 . (12)
− ≤ ≤
=
 A 0 when d 1
 b
 ≥
We simultaneously solved Eqs. 1, 11, 12 and obtained H, A and A as functions of T, V, and d. By replacing T with ρ
a b
= 
using ρ T V, we obtained H, A and A as functions of ρ, V, and d as follows:
a b
/
ρV
d 1
− d ≤ −
=
H ρ,V,d ρV 1 < d < 1 , (13)

( )   −
 ρV


d 1
d ≥






0 d 1

≤ −
+ 2
3 d 1
( ) 1 < d < 1
= 
A a ρ,d   ρ d2 + 3 − , (14)
( ) 

  3d

(cid:0) (cid:1) d 1
− ρ ≥








14 Manuscriptsubmitted to Biophysical Journal

Mechanics ofEpithelial Extrusion
Center axis
Cross-section in 
center cell (A )
s
Boundary between 
first neighbors (A )
p
Second neighbor
(fixed in coordinates)
Center cell
(deformable regular pyramid)
Figure 7: 3D foam geometry of the center, first-neighbor,and second neighbor cells in a planar sheet. The center cell shape is
represented by a deformable regular frustum. The center axis is defined as the axis of the center cell aligned along the normal
direction to the sheet. The boundary faces between the first neighbor cells are aligned radially from the center axis. These
boundary faces connect to the second neighbor cells, whose geometry is fixed in position. The cross-sections are defined as
the regions boundedby the center axis and the lateral edge of the center cell (colored dark gray).Total area of n cross-sections
is represented by A . The boundary faces between the first-neighbor cells are defined as the regions bounded by the edge of
s
the center cell and the lateral edge of the second-neighbor cells (colored light gray). The total area of n boundary faces is
=
represented by A . Because the center axis and the second-neighborcells are fixed in position, the total area of A + A ( C)
p s p
is constant. Therefore, A is derived as C A .
p s
−
3d
d 1
− ρ ≤ −
A ρ,d =   3 d 1 2 . (15)
b ( )   ( − ) 1 < d < 1

  ρ d2 + 3 −

0 d 1
 (cid:0) (cid:1) ≥



Thegeometricparameters P c, A c, and A p intheener  gyfunctionU aredescribedas functionsofn, H, A a, and A b as follows:

π
=
P n, A 2 nA tan , (16)
c a a
( ) n
r
(cid:16) (cid:17)
π
A n,H, A , A = A + A A 2 A A + A + H2ntan , (17)
c a b a b a a b b
( ) − n
r
(cid:16)p p (cid:17) p (cid:16) (cid:17)
n
= +
A n,H, A , A C H A A , (18)
p a b a b
( ) − 2π
2sin
vt
n (cid:16)p p (cid:17)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where C is a constant that represents the total area of the boundary faces between neighbor cells and the cross-sections in the
center cell (Fig. 7). Because A is incorporated into the energy function in Eq. 2 as the first order (i.e., κ A ), C is negligible.
p l p
=
Therefore,wesetC 0forsimplification.BysubstitutingEqs.13–15intoEqs.16–18, weobtainedP , A , and A as functions
c c p
of n, ρ, V, and d as follows:
0 d 1
≤ −
+ 2 π
3n d 1 tan
2 ( ) n 1 < d < 1
P c (n, ρ,d ) =     s ρ d2 + 3 (cid:0) (cid:1) − , (19)

 π
  3nd tan
(cid:0) n (cid:1)
2 d 1
 s ρ ≥
 (cid:0) (cid:1)







Manuscript submitted to Biophysical Journal 15

Okuda and Fujimoto
9d2 3nρV2 tan π
n
d 1
s ρ2 − d ≤ −
(cid:0) (cid:1)

 2

A n, ρ,V,d =   36d2 + 3 d2 + 3 nρ3V2 tan π 1 < d < 1 , (20)
c 
( )   ρ d2 + 3 n −

 q
 9d2 3nρV2 tan π(cid:0) (cid:1) (cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) + (cid:1) n
d 1

 s ρ2 d ≥
 (cid:0) (cid:1)





 3nV2ρ
 − d 1
−v 2π ≤ −
u2d sin
 u
 t n


   6n(cid:16) V2(cid:17) ρ

A n, ρ,V,d =   1 < d < 1 . (21)
p ( )   −v u d2 + 3 sin 2π −
  u t n

(cid:0) 3nV2 (cid:1)ρ (cid:16) (cid:17)

 d 1

    −v u u t2d sin 2 nπ ≥


 (cid:16) (cid:17)

Therefore, by substituting Eqs. 14, 15, 19–21 into Eqs. 3, 6, 8, we obtained analytical expressions of the individual energy


functions. 
Derivation of the local apical perimeter energy
Assuming that more cells than just the first-neighbor cells are fixed in position, we considered the positions of the center and
first-neighbor cells. The perimeter of the first-neighbor cells is represented by P . Therefore, the contribution of the apical
p
perimeter energy is given as
= 2 + 2
U k P P nk P P . (22)
a a c eq a p eq
− −
= =
For simplification, we assume that P P when(cid:0) P P e(cid:1)q. By ca(cid:0)lculating(cid:1)the change in P by the change in P c, P is
p eq c p p
described as a function of P , P , and n, by
c eq
π
1 csc
P = P + − n P P , (23)
p eq c eq
n −
(cid:0) (cid:1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
where the coefficientof the second term 1 csc π n n indicates the ratio of the apical perimeterstrain of the first neighbor
( − [ / ])/
cell to that of the center cell. By substituting Eq. 23 into Eq. 22, we obtained the term of the apical perimeter energy in Eq. 3.
Notably, the results (Fig. 3b–c, a part of Fig. 3d, Fig. 4–6) are independent of the approximation used in the derivation of the
apical perimeter energy, because k is set to zero.
a
Analytical calculation of the critical density
=
By assuming the condition with d 1 and k 0, we obtained the McLaurin series of Eq. 3 for d as Eq. 4. The expression
a
| | ≪
of f in Eq. 4 is given as
2
π
1 π π V csc π
f n, ρ,V = 12 nρ3 cot V2 n3ρ9 tan + n nρtan , (24)
2
( ) 3nρ4V n − n 6 n
  r r ! (cid:2) (cid:3) r
h i h i h i
=
where the first and second terms are associated with A and A , respectively. By solving f 0 using Eq. 24, we obtained the
c p 2
critical density described by Eq. 5. The critical density of Eq. 7 is obtained in the same way.
16 Manuscriptsubmitted to Biophysical Journal