9102 rpA 42  ]EM.tats[  1v78011.4091:viXra
A Comparison of Location-Effect Identification Methods
for Unreplicated Fractional Factorials in the Presence of
Dispersion Effects
Thomas M. Loughin
Department of Statistics and Actuarial Science
Simon Fraser University
Burnaby, BC, V5A 1S6, Canada
Yan Zhang
Risk Assurance Department
PricewaterhouseCoopers
26/F Office Tower A
Beijing Fortune Plaza
7 Dongsanhuan Zhong Road
Chaoyang District
Beijing 100020, PRC
April 26, 2019

Abstract
Most methods for identifying location effects in unreplicated fractional factorial designs as-
sume homoscedasticity of the responses. However, dispersion effects in the underlying process
may create heteroscedasticity in the responses. This heteroscedasticity may go undetected
when location-effect identification is pursued; indeed, methods for identifying dispersion
effects typically require first modeling location effects. Therefore, it is imperative to un-
derstand how location-effect identification methods function in the presence of undetected
dispersion effects. We use simulation studies to examine the robustness of four different
location-identification methods—Box and Meyer (1986), Lenth (1989), Berk and Picard
(1991), and Loughin and Noble (1997)—under models with one or two dispersion effects
of varying sizes. We find that the first three methods are perform fine with respect to error
rates and power, but the Loughin-Noble method loses control of the individual error rate
when moderate-to-large dispersion effects are present.
Keywords: Berk-Picard, Box-Meyer, confounding, Lenth, Loughin-Noble

1 Introduction
In many research and quality-improvement settings, experimental studies are used to test the
effects of a number of factors that may have an impact on some measured responses (Dean
and Lewis 2006). Most often, investigators seek “location effects”—factor main effects or
interactions that impact the mean of the response. In many cases, logistics dictate that
the experiment be run without replication, disabling the potential to derive an independent
estimate of error for testing these location effects (Box, Hunter, and Hunter 2005, Wu and
Hamada 2000). There is a history to the development of methods for identifying location
effects in unreplicated experiments, starting with Daniel (1959). A general overview and
comparison of most of these methods—including those by Daniel (1959), Zahn (1975), Box
and Meyer (1986a), Benski (1989), Bissell (1989), Lenth (1989), Berk and Picard (1991),
Juan and Pen˜a (1992), and Dong (1993)—is given by Hamada and Balakrishnan (1998).
In the past 20–30 years, more recognition has been given to the possibility that the
factorial effects may also impact variance of the responses (see, e.g., Box and Meyer 1986b,
Bergman and Hyn´en 1997, Brenneman and Nair 2001, McGrath and Lin 2001ab). Such
effects are called “dispersion effects,” and they raise or lower the variance corresponding to
their different levels, thus creating heteroscedasticy among the responses. Dispersion effects
may be present regardless of whether or not the model used for the analysis accounts for
them.
It is known that the heteroscedasticity created by a dispersion effect induces correlation on
the location-effect estimates from a linear model (Grego et al. 2000, McGrath and Lin 2003;
see details in Section 2). However, except for a single example case mentioned in Pan (1999),
it is not currently known how heteroscedasticity might affect any of the above-mentioned
location-effect identification methods, either directly or through correlations it induces upon
the estimates of location effects. The goal of this paper is to investigate whether common
statistical analysis methods for location effects in unreplicated 2k (fractional) factorial de-
signs are disturbed by the undetected presence of dispersion effects. Specifically, we use a
simulation study to generate data from 2k designs where different numbers and intensities
of dispersion effects are present. We analyze these data using four methods for identifying
1

location effects that are not meant to account for the unequal variances that the dispersion
effects create: the Lenth method (Lenth 1989), the Berk and Picard method (Berk and Pi-
card 1991), the Box and Meyer method (Box and Meyer 1986a), and a permutation-based
procedure, the Loughin and Noble method (Loughin and Noble 1997). We measure various
forms of power and error rates for each method and summarize the results.
This work is important for two reasons. First, dispersion effects may lurk when they
are unexpected and untested. Thus, location-effect identification methods need to be robust
against their existence, and if they are not, then the risk associated with their use needs to
be quantified. Second, when dispersion effects are expected and tested, most methods for
identifying them—e.g., Box and Meyer (1986b), Bergman and Hyn´en 1997, McGrath and
Lin (2001b) and Brenneman and Nair (2001)—assume that the location model is known.
The dispersion effects are then identified using the residuals from an estimated version of
the model. In practice, the true location model is rarely known; instead it is identified
using one of the methods mentioned above. However, these methods are not perfect, and
it is well known that failure to properly identify location effects can have adverse effects on
dispersion-effect identification (Pan 1999, McGrath and Lin 2001a, Pan and Taam 2002). If
the presence of dispersion effects causes location-effect models to be mis-identified, then this
could in turn inhibit the detection of these dispersion effects.
The outline of the paper is as follows. Section 2 reviews the impact that dispersion
effects have on the OLS estimates from model (1). Section 3 provides some details on the
location-effect testing methods used in our study. The simulation model and other settings
are given in Section 4, and the results of the simulations are presented in Section 5. We
draw conclusions and note a particularly important ramification of the results in Section 6.
2 How Dispersion Effects Change Location-Effect Es-
timates
We focus on experimental designs of the 2k structure, because these are popular and well-
studied choices for screening large numbers of factors (Wu and Hamada 2000; Box, Hunter,
and Hunter 2005). These designs consist of k factors to be studied, each at two levels.
2

Fractional factorial designs exist that allow study of more than k factors within the same
experimental design construct. The effect estimates have exactly the same mathematical
properties regardless of whether the factorial design is whole or fractional, although inter-
pretation of the effect estimates in the latter case is clouded by the fact that each estimate
represents more than one true effect. Statistical analysis techniques treat all such designs as
equivalent, so we refer here only to full 2k factorials for simplicity.
It is common to use a linear model to represent the responses from a 2k design. Let
n = 2k denote the number of experimental runs and let X = [x ,x ,...,x ] be the
n×n 0 1 n−1
design matrix for an unreplicated 2k factorial experiment, where x = (1,...,1)(cid:48) and x =
0 j
(±1,...,±1)(cid:48),j = 1,...,n − 1, are pairwise orthogonal. The usual linear statistical model is
Y = Xβ + (cid:15) (1)
where Y = (y ,y ,...,y )(cid:48) is the vector of responses (possibly transformed to fit model
1 2 n
assumptions), and β is a vector of unknown parameters. The parameters β ,...,β
n×1 1 n−1
are called “location effects.” Finally, (cid:15) = ((cid:15) ,...,(cid:15) )(cid:48) is the vector of random error terms.
1 n
The typical assumption is that (cid:15) ,i = 1,...,n, are independent and identically distributed
i
(i.i.d.) N(0,σ2) random variables, where σ2 is the error variance of the responses.
Due to the to structure of X, ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of β are easy
to compute and enjoy some useful properties. In particular, the location-effect estimates,
ˆ
β , j = 1,...,n − 1 are i.i.d N(0,σ2/n). However, the lack of replication prevents the
j
calculation of an unbiased estimate of σ2 without added assumptions. As a result, numerous
methods, each based on different sets of assumptions, have been developed for testing the
significance of the factorial effects, as detailed in Section 1.
If dispersion effects are present in a model, correlations are induced among the OLS
ˆ
estimates β , j = 1,...,n − 1. In this section we review the nature of these correlations.
j
To fix ideas, we consider a standard linear model that accounts for heteroscedasticity:
Y = Xβ + (cid:15), (cid:15) ∼ N(0,Σ) (2)
where Σ is a diagonal matrix that depends on the factors through columns of X. There
are many ways to relate the covariance matrix to X. Most of literature has concentrated
3

on two specific parametric forms: the additive model and the multiplicative model. Rao
(1970), Bergman and Hyn´en (1997), and Brenneman and Nair (2001) use the additive model,
(cid:80)n−1
σ2 = γ + x γ , where γ represents the unknown dispersion effect associated with x .
i 0 j=1 ij j j j
Alternatively, Cook and Weisberg (1983), Davidian and Carroll (1987), McGrath and Lin
(2001ab, 2003), and Henrey and Loughin (2017) consider a multiplicative variance model in
their work. In this paper, we assume a multiplicative variance model similar to that used by
McGrath and Lin (2001ab, 2003), in which the ith diagonal element of Σ is
n−1
(cid:89)
σ2 = σ2 ∆x ij/2 , (3)
i j
j=1
where σ2 and ∆ ,j = 1,...,n−1 are unknown parameters. In particular, suppose that ∆ = 1
j j
for all j (cid:54)= d. Then ∆ represents the ratio of variance for observations at the + level of x
d d
to the variance at the − level. More generally, ∆ is the ratio of variances at the + and −
d
levels of x , holding all other factors constant.
d
Now suppose that data arise from models (2) and (3), but location effects are estimated
ˆ
by OLS. Then β is distributed as multivariate normal with mean β and covariance matrix
ˆ
σ2(X(cid:48)ΣX)/22k. The diagonal entries of this covariance matrix of β are identical, so that
ˆ
each β has the same marginal distribution. However, these effect estimates have non-zero
j
correlation, so they are no longer independent.
In particular, suppose that factor A produces a dispersion effect, ∆ , and that there are
A
no other dispersion effects present. Then for all j = 1,...,n − 1
(cid:112) 1
var(βˆ ) = σ2( ∆ + √ )/2k+1. (4)
j A
∆
A
Furthermore, let j and j be indexes for any two columns of X whose elementwise product is
1 2
the column for A. As in McGrath and Lin (2001b), we refer to {A,j ,j } as an “interaction
1 2
triple” and use the common notation j ◦ j = A to represent the relationship. Grego et
1 2
ˆ ˆ
al. (2000) and McGrath and Lin (2003) show that the correlation between β and β is
j j
1 2
√
( ∆ − √1 )
A
ˆ ˆ ∆
ρ(β ,β ) = √ A . (5)
j j
1 2 ( ∆ + √1 )
A
∆
A
If j and j do not form an interaction triple with A, then the correlation is 0. Note that
1 2
there are n/2 − 1 pairs of columns that satisfy j ◦ j = A where both j > 0 and j > 0.
1 2 1 2
Thus, each dispersion effect creates several correlated pairs of location-effect estimates.
4

These correlations can be fairly large under very realistic circumstances. For a moderately-
sized dispersion effect such as ∆ = 9—i.e., a standard deviation ratio of 3—the correlation
A
is 0.8. For a larger dispersion effect of 25, the correlation is 0.92.
For multiple dispersion effects, the situation is more complicated. If there are two disper-
sion effects corresponding to factors A and B, with magnitudes ∆ and ∆ respectively, an
A B
extra dispersion effect is induced in their interaction column AB (McGrath and Lin 2003):
1 + ∆ ∆
A B
∆ = .
AB
∆ + ∆
A B
Thus, {A,B,AB} form a “dispersion triple.” In this setting, the OLS location-effect esti-
mates still have common variance,
(cid:112) 1 (cid:112) 1
var(βˆ ) = σ2( ∆ + √ )( ∆ + √ )/2k+2.
i A B
∆ ∆
A B
However, the correlation pattern is more complex (Grego et al. 2000):
 √ 1
 ( ∆ − √ )
  A
 ∆
  A , if j ◦ j = A
 √ 1 1 2

  ( ∆ + √ )
 A
 ∆
 A
  √ 1

 ( ∆ − √ )
   B ∆
 B , if j ◦ j = B
ρ(βˆ ,βˆ ) = √ 1 1 2 (6)
j 1 j 2 ( ∆ + √ )
 B
 ∆
 B
  √ 1 √ 1

 ( ∆ − √ )( ∆ − √ )
 A B
  ∆ ∆
 A B , if j ◦ j = AB

 √ 1 √ 1 1 2

 ( ∆ + √ )( ∆ + √ )

 A B
 ∆ ∆
 A B

 0 otherwise
Thus, when one dispersion effect exists, every location effect estimate except the one cor-
responding to the dispersion effect is correlated with one other. When there are two disper-
sion effects, the location-effect estimates corresponding to the dispersion triple are pairwise
correlated, and every other location effect estimate is pairwise correlated with three other
ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ
location effect estimates. For the example above, (β ,β ,β ,β ) form a “correlation
C AC BC ABC
ˆ ˆ ˆ ˆ
quadruple”. For convenience we also would call (β ,β ,β ,β ) a correlation quadruple,
0 A B AB
even though we are not generally concerned with testing the intercept.
5

3 Location-Effect Testing Methods Used in Simula-
tions
Grego et al. (2000) studies the impacts that the dispersion-induced correlations have on the
expected order statistics in a half-normal plot in 23 and 24 factorials. They find that the
expected order statistic corresponding to the most extreme effect estimate is slightly closer to
0 than expected under independence, causing the respective effect estimate to seem slightly
less important than it should be. For example, when ∆ = 9, the actual expected order
A
statistics are 5% and 3% smaller than their counterparts under independence for the 23 and 24
designs, respectively. It is not known whether these correlations affect more formal analysis
procedures that are based on an assumption of independence of the estimated location effects.
Our simulation study attempts to address this for a variety of well-known procedures.
Hamada and Balakrishnan (1998) review and compare the performance of 24 existing or
modified versions of methods for testing for location effects under model (1). They compare
the methods’ error rates and powers under a 24 design with varying numbers of effects of
equal size. They find that, while some methods perform quite poorly at times, none of
the remaining methods are uniformly better than others. We therefore e selectthree meth-
ods from their study that have reasonably good power overall, while representing different
foundational structures.
The Lenth (1989) method is a particularly easy method to compute and is recommended
by Wu and Hamada (2000). It standardizes the location-effect estimates contrasts by the
estimated pseudo standard error (PSE) that is calculated in two steps. First, any effects
with estimated magnitudes more than 3.75 times the median magnitude are temporarily
removed. Then the PSE is set to 1.5 times the median magnitude among the remaining
effect estimates, and all estimates are standardized using this PSE. Lenth suggests comparing
standardized effects to a t distribution, although Loughin (1998) and Ye and Hamada
(n−1)/3
(2000) separately determine alternative critical values that achieve control of various error
rates.
Berk and Picard (1991) propose an ANOVA-based method using a trimmed mean squared
error (TMSE). It is similar to the Lenth method in that the smaller effect estimates form the
6

error term against which the larger estimates are compared. However, the Berk and Picard
method uses a fixed number (e.g., 60%) of the effects in the error term rather than choosing
the number adaptively. It also sums the squared coefficients rather than using a median
absolute value. This has the potential to make the error term more stable when the number
of inert contrasts is at least as large as the number assumed. Berk and Picard (1991) obtain
critical values based on a numerical study. The critical values given in Table 1 of their paper
are computed for samples of sizes N = 8,12,16,20,32.
In contrast to these methods, Box and Meyer (1986a) suggest a Bayesian approach based
on the sparsity assumption that only a few of the factorial effects are are likely to be active.
It is assumed a priori that β = 0 for inactive location effects and β ∼ N(0,τ2) for active
j j
location effects, j = 1,...,n − 1. An effect β is active with prior probability η. Thus,
j
estimated contrasts corresponding to inactive effects have distribution N(0,σ2/2k) while es-
timated contrasts corresponding to active effects have distribution N(0,τ2+σ2/2k). In other
ˆ ˆ
words, they assume that β ,...,β are i.i.d. from a scale-contaminated normal distribution.
1 n−1
For each effect, the marginal posterior probability of being active is computed by numerical
integration. Box and Meyer (1986a) recommend that the effects whose marginal posterior
probability exceeds 0.5 be declared active. They suggest values for the prior parameters
based on analysis of ten published data sets of unreplicated fractional factorial designs, and
report that “the conclusions to be drawn from analysis are usually insensitive to moderate
changes” in these parameters (p. 13).
Finally, we include a fourth method that has a completely different basis from the previ-
ous three, the permutation-based procedure of Loughin and Noble (1997). It is a sequential
algorithm that has the potential to test up to n − k effects. As with most randomization
tests, y ,...,y are exchangeable under the null hypothesis of no active effects. The test
1 n
statistic is the largest magnitude among the location-effect estimates. Testing whether the
corresponding effect is active consists of finding the re-randomization distribution test statis-
tic. Tests for other effects are constructed in the same manner, except that the permutations
are applied to residuals from a model containing all effects of larger estimated magnitude
than the one being tested. The tests are carried out in order of decreasing effect-estimate
magnitude, leading to a sequence of p-values. This sequence is not necessarily monotone, so
7

comparisons are made against simulated critical values in a “step-up” manner. Specifically,
the effect of smallest magnitude whose p-value is below the critical value is declared active,
as are all effects with larger magnitudes.
Thus, we have four location-effect identification methods based on three very different
analysis approaches (standardizing contrasts is a popular technique, so we have two variants
of this approach in the Lenth and Berk-Picard procedures). However, all assume that the
estimated effects are independent of one another, which is clearly not true in the presence
of dispersion effects.
4 Description of Simulation Study
We now describe the simulation study conducted to examine the robustness of these four
location-effect identification methods in the presence of one or two dispersion effects. We
first provide an overview of the study, then give details on the specific settings.
The general process is as follows. We generate data from model (2) and (3) with k = 4,
so that homoscedasticity is the only violated assumption for the testing methods. We fix the
true location effects and true dispersion effects at specific sizes for both models. We then
simulate data sets under these models and apply the four testing methods to each data set.
We separately record the proportion of times that each factorial effect is identified as active
and use these to compute power and error rate summaries for each method. All simulations
are run in SAS/IML using 1825 data sets per setting. This number ensures that any error
rate that should nominally be 0.05 will lie between 0.04 and 0.06 with 0.95 probability.
Simulations are conducted under the 24 setting for several reasons. It is the smallest size
for which both location and dispersion effects can practically be tested. It is also among the
most common designs reported in the literature, and it corresponds to the experiment size
reported in the extensive simulation study by Hamada and Balakrishnan (1998). Because
the properties of OLS estimates in the presence of dispersion effects are the same regardless
of the experiment size, we expect that our results should be reasonable representations of
what can be expected in other common sizes of experiment.
We use the usual letter identifiers (A, B, C, D, AB,..., ABCD) to label factorial effects.
8

We denote a location effect model by L and a dispersion-effect model by D. We consider
models with either one dispersion effect—D = {A} with effect size ∆ —or two—D = {A,B}
A
with effect sizes (∆ ,∆ ). In the former case, we consider location models with either 0,
A B
1, or 2 active effects, while in the latter we consider just 0 or 1 active effect. In all cases,
we assign the active location effects strategically as indicated in Table 1 to allow us to
examine different cases where correlated location-effect estimates and/or location-dispersion
confounding may be present.
Table 1: Location and dispersion models used in the simulations.
D L Explanation
A Location effect is dispersion effect
A
B Location effect is different from dispersion effect
B,C Neither of location effects is dispersion effect
A A,B One location effect is dispersion effect
B,AB The interaction of location effects is dispersion effect
A,B A Location effect is one of the dispersion effects
A,B C Location effect is not associated with dispersion effects
A,B AB Location effect is the interaction of the dispersion effects
Dispersion-effect sizes are set to values ∆ = 1,22,32,52,102,202,502, representing a
A
range from null to extremely large values.1 Where two dispersion effects are present, we set
∆ = ∆ .
A B
Because the variance of location-effect estimates changes depending on the magnitude
1It is somewhat easier to measure heteroscedasticity in real data with continuous explanatory variables
than in unreplicated 2k factorials. In separate research, Gelfand (2015) studies 25 such data sets exhibiting
“significant” heteroscedasticity, as determined by a statistically significant positive slope in a plot of the
absolute values of residuals vs. fitted values. Estimated standard deviation ratios between low- and high-
variance regions are found to range from 1.1 to 64.4 (reduced to 15.6 with a possible outlier removed), with
a median of 3.2 and a third quartile of 5.9. Furthermore, Henrey and Loughin (2017) perform joint location-
dispersion analysis of three oft-studied experiments, and find that two have apparent active dispersion effects.
In both of these, the effect estimate corresponds to a standard deviation ration of roughly 5. Thus, our chosen
values represent a range of realistic dispersion effect sizes, although the upper two levels might be somewhat
extreme.
9

| L    |
|:-----|
| A    |
| B    |
| B,C  |
| A,B  |
| B,AB |
| A    |
| C    |
| AB   |

of dispersion effects, we set the sizes of the location effects using the concept of EPower
proposed by McGrath and Lin (2003). Specifically, the magnitude of a location effect is
defined so that the probability that it would be declared active using a σ-known Z test with
α = 0.05 is fixed at one of three levels: “small” (0.2), “medium” (0.5) or “large” (0.9).
Details on the calculations are given in McGrath and Lin (2003) and Zhang (2010).
For each combination of L,D,∆ , and location-effect sizes, 1825 data sets are generated
A
from model (2) and analyzed using each of the four testing methods. For brevity, we refer
to the Lenth (1989) method as “LEN89,” the Berk and Picard (1991) method as “BP91,”
the Box and Meyer (1986a) method as “BM86,” and the Loughin and Noble (1997) method
as “LN97.” For each method, we record the number of times each of the 15 location effects
is declared active. We refer to this as the rejection rate (RR) for each effect. In addition we
compute three commonly-used summaries of these RRs:
• individual error rate (IER), the average proportion of effects declared active among all
inactive effects;
• experimentwise error rate (EER), the proportion of data sets in which at least one
inactive effect is declared active; and
• average power (AP), the average proportion of effects declared active among all active
effects;
These summaries have been commonly applied in the literature. For example, all three were
used by Loughin and Noble (1997), Hamada and Balakrishnan (1998), and Ye et al. (2001),
among others. We an additional definition of power when there are two active location
effects:
• joint power (JP), the proportion of data sets in which both active effects are declared
active.
As previous authors have found (e.g., Hamada and Balakrishnan 1998), not all analysis
methods maintain their error rates at nominal levels using the default setting recommended
by their respective authors. Our findings, based on an initial set of 1825 simulations, are
10

Table 2: Performance of the four methods after calibration to IER=0.05. The values below
the columns 0,1,...,7 are the proportions of simulations that declare that many effects as
active when there are no location or dispersion effects.
Number of Declared Active Effects
Method IER EER
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 ≥ 7
LEN89 0.586 0.200 0.099 0.067 0.028 0.009 0.008 0.003 0.051 0.414
BM86 0.526 0.292 0.098 0.042 0.019 0.010 0.009 0.004 0.051 0.474
BP91 0.541 0.264 0.116 0.055 0.018 0.005 0.002 0.000 0.050 0.459
LN97 0.726 0.140 0.037 0.032 0.012 0.008 0.014 0.039 0.049 0.274
that LN97 and BP91 do have IER within simulation error of 0.05 using the recommended
settings. For LEN89, using the recalibrated critical values given in Loughin (1998) also
results in acceptable control of IER. However, BM86 needs to be recalibrated, meaning that
a new posterior probability threshold must be chosen, above which an effect is declared
active. Using the approach described in Zhang (2010), we determined that a threshold of
0.3187 achieves acceptable IER.
Because the methods all use different theoretical foundations, they do not all exhibit the
same EER when IER is held fixed. Table 2 gives the IER and EER of the calibrated methods
based on 1825 simulated data sets. It also shows the number of times 0, 1, 2, ... effects are
falsely declared active.
5 Results
In this section, we compare the four methods’ estimated error rates and power. Although
we study cases with location effects of various magnitudes, results in terms of both error
rates and power change in very predictable ways across different magnitudes of location
effects. We therefore focus attention on the case of location effects with medium EPower
(theoretical power = 0.5), and observe changes in rejection rates across different magnitudes
of dispersion effects. Similarly, when there are two dispersion effects, cases where they differ
in magnitude offer no special insights into the behavior of the analysis methods, so we focus
11

|   Number of Declared Active Effects |   None |   None |   None |   None |   None |   None | None   |   IER |
|------------------------------------:|-------:|-------:|-------:|-------:|-------:|-------:|:-------|------:|
|                               0     |  1     |  2     |  3     |  4     |  5     |  6     | ≥ 7    |       |
|                               0.586 |  0.2   |  0.099 |  0.067 |  0.028 |  0.009 |  0.008 | 0.003  | 0.051 |
|                               0.526 |  0.292 |  0.098 |  0.042 |  0.019 |  0.01  |  0.009 | 0.004  | 0.051 |
|                               0.541 |  0.264 |  0.116 |  0.055 |  0.018 |  0.005 |  0.002 | 0.000  | 0.05  |
|                               0.726 |  0.14  |  0.037 |  0.032 |  0.012 |  0.008 |  0.014 | 0.039  | 0.049 |

on cases where the dispersion effects have the same magnitude. More complete simulation
results are available in Zhang (2010).
Where plots of rejection rates against dispersion-effect magnitude are presented, the
values on the x-axis are deliberately left unscaled so that we may focus on more typical
small-to-moderate sizes of dispersion effects.
5.1 Error Rates
First, Table 2 shows that LN97 maintains a considerably different profile of effect-detection
frequency than the other three methods even when there are no dispersion effects. It tends to
have a higher chance of detecting a large number of effects, which leads to a lower EER than
other methods. It is important to keep this context in mind when considering performance
in the presence of active effects.
Example IER plots against dispersion-effect magnitude are given in Figures 1a and 1c.
All four methods hold similar error rates near the nominal level when there are no dispersion
effects or only very small ones. All methods except LN97 maintain these error rates regardless
of the presence of dispersion effects. However, as the dispersion-effect magnitude grows, the
IER for LN97 rises considerably. The increase is relatively small as long as each ∆ ≤ 5, but
for more extreme dispersion effects the IER increases to well above 0.1. Analogous results
hold when there are active location effects, although in general the IERs decrease slowly as
the number of active location effects increases.
The results for EER shown in Figures 1b and 1d reflect this same trend and show an
interesting additional one. The EER for LN97 increases sharply when the dispersion effects
become larger, and the increase is greater when there are two dispersion effects than when
there is one. On the other hand, the EERs for the other three methods decrease, despite the
relative stability of the IERs. As discussed in Section 2, the increasing sizes of dispersion
effects create increasing correlations among pairs of location-effect estimates. The analysis
methods apparently identify these pairs as jointly active or inactive with increasing relative
frequency while maintaining approximately constant overall IERs. Thus, a relatively smaller
proportion of data sets experience at least one false rejection.
Results for cases with one or two active location effects show similar trends, although
12

IER EER
0.20 0.50
0.18 0.45
0.16
0.40
0.14
0.35
0.12
0.30
0.10
0.25
0.08
0.20
0.06
0.04 0.15
0.02 0.10
1 2^2 3^2 5^2 10^2 20^2 50^2 1 2^2 3^2 5^2 10^2 20^2 50^2
Dispersion Dispersion
(a) Individual error rates, D = {A} (b) Experimentwise error rates, D = {A}
IER EER
0.20 0.50
0.18 0.45
0.16
0.40
0.14
0.35
0.12
0.30
0.10
0.25
0.08
0.20
0.06
0.04 0.15
0.02 0.10
2^2 3^2 5^2 10^2 20^2 50^2 2^2 3^2 5^2 10^2 20^2 50^2
Dispersion Dispersion
(c) Individual error rates, D = {A,B} (d) Experimentwise error rates, D = {A,B}
Figure 1: Error rates of location-effect identification methods when there are dispersion
effects of varying sizes. Individual error rates are initially calibrated to 0.05. ‘BM’=Box-
Meyer, ‘BP’=Berk-Picard, ‘LE’=Lenth, ‘LN’=Loughin-Noble.
13

somewhat muted compared to Figures 1b and 1d. For example, when there are two active
location effects, the EER for LN97 does not surpass those for the other methods until ∆ is
at least 102 in two cases and 202 in one.
5.2 Power
Average power for a sampling of cases is shown in Figure 2. The most notable feature on
all of these cases is that the average power of LN97 increases as the disparity in dispersions
increases. This is contrasted against little to no increase in average power for other three
analysis methods. Among these three, BM86 sometimes enjoys a slight advantage in power,
particularly when there are two dispersion effects.
Comparing across cases, LN97 shows a much starker increase in power with dispersion-
effect magnitude when there are two dispersion effects than when there is one. This pattern
is evident regardless of which factor contains the active location effect, and is consistent
with this method’s elevated error rates with two dispersion effects. The other three methods
also experience power increases in these cases, albeit of a much smaller magnitude. In no
case does the estimated power reach the EPower level to which the location effect sizes
were calibrated. This is not surprising, because the EPowers are based on the known error
variance and a normal sampling distribution. In unreplicated experiments, the ability to
estimate process variance accurately is hampered by the lack of data and the uncertainty
associated with trying to distinguish between active and inert effects.
Plots of the joint power to detect both location effects are given in Figure 3 for cases
where there is one dispersion effect and two location effects. The joint power is clearly higher
when the dispersion effect occurs at the intersection of the two location effects (Figure 3b)
than when it does not (Figure 3b), and it increases considerably as the size of the dispersion
effect increases. This is a clear result of the positive correlation induced on the location-effect
estimates by a spurious dispersion effect at their intersection. While this may seem at first
to be a welcome result—a way to “boost power for free”—note that this apparent boost in
power only occurs when the sign of log(∆ ) matches the sign of β β . If they had been
A B AB
of opposite signs, the power would have decreased, rather than increased, with increasing
magnitude of ∆ .
A
14

Avg Pwr Avg Pwr
0.55 0.55
0.50 0.50
0.45 0.45
0.40 0.40
0.35 0.35
0.30 0.30
0.25 0.25
0.20 0.20
0.15 0.15
1 2^2 3^2 5^2 10^2 20^2 50^2 2^2 3^2 5^2 10^2 20^2 50^2
Dispersion Dispersion
(a) Average Power, D = {A}, L = {A} (b) Average Power, D = {A,B}, L = {A}
Avg Pwr Avg Pwr
0.55 0.55
0.50 0.50
0.45 0.45
0.40 0.40
0.35 0.35
0.30 0.30
0.25 0.25
0.20 0.20
0.15 0.15
1 2^2 3^2 5^2 10^2 20^2 50^2 1 2^2 3^2 5^2 10^2 20^2 50^2
Dispersion Dispersion
(c) Average Power, D = {A}, L = {A,B} (d) Average Power, D = {A}, , L = {B,AB}
Figure 2: Average power of location-effect identification methods when there are dispersion
effects of varying sizes. Theoretical EPowers are initially calibrated to 0.50. ‘BM’=Box-
Meyer, ‘BP’=Berk-Picard, ‘LE’=Lenth, ‘LN’=Loughin-Noble. Note that a 95% confidence
interval around an estimate of 0.30 is approximately ±0.02.
15

Jt Pwr Jt Pwr
0.35 0.35
0.30 0.30
0.25 0.25
0.20 0.20
0.15 0.15
0.10 0.10
0.05 0.05
1 2^2 3^2 5^2 10^2 20^2 50^2 1 2^2 3^2 5^2 10^2 20^2 50^2
Dispersion Dispersion
(a) Joint Power, D = {A}, L = {A,B} (b) Joint Power, D = {A}, L = {B,AB}
Figure 3: Joint power of location-effect identification methods when there are two location
effects and one dispersion effect. Theoretical powers are initially calibrated to 0.50 per
location effect. ‘BM’=Box-Meyer, ‘BP’=Berk-Picard, ‘LE’=Lenth, ‘LN’=Loughin-Noble.
ˆ ˆ
To further explore this property, Figure 4 shows observed distributions of β and β in
B AB
the somewhat extreme case where ∆ = 400 and the EPowers for the two location effects
A
effects are both 0.9. In the right plot, both location effects are positive, while on the left,
β < 0. Figure 5 shows the analogous plot for the case where D = {A},L = {A,B}. The
B
the theoretical rejection regions on which the EPowers are based are given by the shaded
regions in each plot. Different plotting symbols indicate whether the pair of effects was
jointly declared active. Note that the actual rejection region varies across data sets in the
simulations, so not all points within the theoretical rejection region are identified as active
and not all points outside it are declared inactive.
Figure 4 shows the strong correlation between location effect estimates that is induced by
the extreme dispersion effect. It also shows that the fraction of points that falls within the
rejection region is substantially higher when the correlation causes the distribution of points
to align with the position of this region than when the distribution cuts across the corner of
it. Thus, joint power is much higher when the sign of log(∆ ) matches the sign of β β .
A B AB
On the other hand, in Figure 5 the two location effect estimates are uncorrelated, because
the interaction of these terms does not match the factor for the dispersion effect. Thus, the
fraction of the distribution that falls witin the rejection region is the same, regardless of the
signs of the true location effects.
16

(a) β β > 0 (b) β β < 0
B AB B AB
ˆ ˆ
Figure 4: β vs β in the case D = {A},L = {B,AB} with ∆ = 400. The shaded region
B AB A
is the theoretical rejection region for declaring both location effects jointly active. A red ‘•’
represents that both B and AB are declared active; a blue ‘+’ indicates otherwise.
(a) β β B > 0 (b) β β B < 0
B A B A
ˆ ˆ
Figure 5: β vs β in the case D = {A},L = {A,B} with ∆ = 400. The shaded region
A B A
is the theoretical rejection region for declaring both location effects jointly active. A red ‘•’
represents that both A and B are declared active; a blue ‘+’ indicates otherwise.
The influence of dispersion effects on tests for each different location effect is shown in
Figure 6, using BM86 as a representative of the methods. This plot shows the rejection rate
for each individual effect when BM86 is applied to the model D = {A,B},∆ = ∆ = 52
A B
with either L = {A} or L = {C} set to medium EPower. We see in each case that the
active location effect has a much higher rejection rate than the inactive effects, as expected.
However, we also see that the error rates for inert location effects associated with (1) the
dispersion effects, (2) the interaction of dispersion effects (AB), and (3) the interaction of
location and dispersion effects (AC,BC,ABC in the second case) are all slightly elevated
relative to the baseline set by the remaining effects. Indeed, the location effect at B for
17

RR
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05
0.00
A B C D A A A B B C A A A B A
B C D C D D B B C C B
C D D D C
D
Effect
Figure 6: Rejection rates for each effect when BM86 is used on model D = {A,B},∆ =
A
∆ = 52 with either L = {A} (red) or L = {C} (purple) with medium EPower.
B
L = {A} experiences the dual increase due to being associated both with a dispersion effect
and with a location-dispersion interaction through A and AB. The location effect at AB
for L = {A} experiences a similar increase. In all cases where the “A” and “C” lines appear
different for a given location effect, this difference is statistically significant at the 0.01 level
or lower. Thus, it is clear that interacting with a dispersion effect causes a location effect to
experience a higher rejection rate.
6 Discussion and Conclusions
This paper considerably expands our understanding of the impact of dispersion effects on
location-effect estimation in unreplicated 2k (fractional) factorial designs. Pan (1999) con-
ducted a simulation consisting of a single case with one dispersion effect set to ∆ = 72, using
only Len89 for the analysis of location effects. He found that there was little impact on
18

estimated RR for any of the effects, which we corroborate here. However, our finding that
the LN97 is somewhat affected by unidentified dispersion effects indicates that Pan’s result
does not hold equally for all methods. Among the four methods that we considered, BM86
may enjoy a very slight advantage in terms of power when dispersion effects are added to
the data. However, the advantage is small, and the simplicity of Len87 is appealing.
The heteroscedasticity-induced correlation has some side effects that are documented
here. While the correlation has minimal effect on the marginal power to detect a real effect,
the joint power of members of an interaction triple is radically changed. Depending on
whether the direction of the dispersion effect agrees or disagrees with the sign of the product
of the location effects, joint power may be either increased or decreased by the dispersion
effect. In problems where there is also interest in identifying dispersion effects, this can create
a feedback loop. In the case where the sign on the product agrees with the dispersion effect,
there is increased probability that both location effects are left out of the model together.
This artificially enhances the size of the dispersion effect, increasing the chance that it is
detected but falsely inflating its estimated magnitude as well (McGrath and Lin 2001a). On
the other hand, when the sign on the product disagrees the situation is less concerning: the
probability of failing to detect both active location effects is smaller than usual, so there is
a reduced chance of an impact on the dispersion effect identification. When it does occur,
however, the apparent magnitude of the dispersion effect is reduced, making it harder to
detect.
As with any simulation study, there are certain limitations to these results. Since these
four analysis methods were hand-picked from among many possible approaches—albeit with
reason as discussed in Section 3—one should be careful not to infer anything about how
other methods might or might not be impacted by dispersion effects. This is particularly
true considering the adverse effects on LN97, which suggests that different methods do not
all respond in the same way. Similarly, we are limited to drawing conclusions about the
cases actually studied here—one or two dispersion effects and zero, one, or two location
effects—and can make only educated guesses regarding trends for other cases. Also, since
we only studied the 24 case explicitly, one should be tentative about extending the results
to other experiment sizes. However, simulations conducted by Balakrishnan and Hamada
19

(1998) indicate that there is nothing different about the size of the problem that changes how
well different methods perform, and there is nothing about the mathematics of the problem
that depends on the size.
In conlusion, when an analyst wants to identify location effects and has no interest in
dispersion effects, the results in this paper provide comfort that several standard methods of
location-effect identification are relatively robust in the presence of dispersion effects. How-
ever, when there may also be interest in understanding the dispersion effects in the data,
there are better methods for identifying both effect types than the sequential application
of separate location- and dispersion-effect estimation methods. In particular, Henrey and
Loughin (2017) derive a new information criterion for heteroscedastic normal linear models
and use it in a model-averaging context to simultaneously identify both location and disper-
sion effects. They demonstrate that this procedure can identify both location and dispersion
effects with greater accuracy than a combined sequential procedure consisting of Len87 for
location effects and the modified Harvey (1976) method suggested by Brenneman and Nair
for dispersion effects.
7 Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Science and Engineering Research Council of
Canada.
20

References
Benski, H.C. (1989). “Use of a Normality Test to Identify Significant Effects in
Factorial Designs”. Journal of Quality Technology, 21, pp. 174–178.
Bergman, B. and Hyn´en, A. (1997). “Dispersion Effects from Unreplicated Designs
in the 2k−p Series”. Technometrics, 39, pp. 191–198.
Berk, K.N. and Picard, R.R. (1991). “Significance Tests for Saturated Orthogonal
Arrays”. Journal of Quality Technology, 23, pp. 79–89.
Bissell, A.F. (1992). “Mean squares in Saturated Factorial Designs Revisited”. Jour-
nal of Applied Statistics, 19, pp. 351–366.
Box, G.E.P., Hunter, W.G., and Hunter, J.S. (2005). Statistics for Experimenters,
2nd ed., John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ.
Box, G.E.P. and Meyer, R.D. (1986a). “An analysis for unreplicated fractional fac-
torials”. Technometrics, 28, pp. 1118.
Box, G.E.P. and Meyer, R.D. (1986b). “Dispersion Effects from Fractional Designs”.
Technometrics, 28, pp. 19–27.
Brenneman, W.A. and Nair, V.N. (2001). “Methods for Identifying Dispersion Effects
in Unreplicated Factorial Experiments: A Critical Analysis and Proposed Strategies”.
Technometrics, 43, pp. 388–405.
Cook, R.D. and Weisberg, S. (1983). “Diagnostics for Heteroscedasticity in Regres-
sion”. Biometrika, 70, pp. 1–10.
Daniel, C. (1959). “Use of Half-Normal Plots in Interpreting Factorial Two-Level
Experiments”. Technometrics, 1, pp. 311–341.
Davidian, M and Carroll, R.J. (1987). “Variance Function Estimation”. Journal of
the American Statistical Association, 82, pp. 1079–1091.
Dean, A. and Lewis, S. (Eds.) (2006). Screening: Methods for Experimentation in
Industry, Drug Discovery, and Genetics, Springer, London.
Dong, F. (1993). “On the Identification of Active Contrasts in Unreplicated Fractional
Factorials”. Statistica Sinica, 3, pp. 209–218.
Gelfand, S. (2015). “Understanding the impact of heteroscedasticity on the predic-
tive ability of modern regression methods”. MSc. Thesis, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, BC, Canada.
21

Grego, J.M., Lewis, J.F., and Craney, T.A. (2000). “Quantile Plots for Mean Effects
in the Presence of Variance Effects for 2k Designs”. Communications in Statistics—
Computation and Simulation, 29, pp. 1109–1133.
Hamada, M. and Balakrishnan, N. (1998). “Analyzing Unreplicated Factorial Exper-
iments: A Review with Some New Proposals”. Statistica Sinica, 8, pp. 1–41.
Harvey, A.C. (1976). “Regression Models with Multiplicative Heteroscedasticity”
Econometrica, 44, pp. 461–465.
Henrey, A.J. and Loughin, T.M. (2017). “Joint Identification of Location and Dis-
persion Effects in Unreplicated Two-Level Factorials” Technometrics, 59, pp. 23–35.
Juan, J. and Pen˜a, D. (1992). “A Simple Method to Identify Significant Effects in
Unreplicated Two-level Factorial Designs”. Communications in Statistics - Theory
and Methods, 21, pp. 1383–1403.
Lenth, R.V. (1989). “Quick and Easy Analysis of Unreplicated Factorials”. Techno-
metrics, 31, pp. 469–473.
Loughin, T.M. (1998). “Calibration of the Lenth Test for Unreplicated Factorial
Designs”. Journal of Quality Technology, 30, pp. 171–175.
Loughin, T.M. and Noble, W. (1997). “A Permutation Test for Effects in an Unrepli-
cated Factorial Design”. Technometrics, 39, pp. 180–190.
McGrath, R.N. and Lin, D.K. (2001a). “Confounding of Location and Dispersion
Effects in Unreplicated Fractional Factorials”. Journal of Quality Technology, 33,
pp. 129–139.
McGrath, R.N. and Lin, D.K. (2001b). “Testing Multiple Dispersion Effects in Un-
replicated Fractional Factorial Designs”. Technometrics, 43, pp. 06–414.
McGrath, R.N. (2003). “Separating Location and Dispersion Effects in Unreplicated
Fractional Factorial Designs”. Journal of Quality Technology, 35, pp. 306–316.
Pan, G. (1999). “The Impact of Unidentified Location Effects on Dispersion Effect
Identification from Unreplicated Factorial Designs”. Technometrics, 41, pp. 313–326.
Pan, G and Taam, W (2002). “On Generalized Linear Model Method for Detecting
Dispersion Effects in Unreplicated Factorial Designs”. Journal of Statistical Compu-
tation and Simulation, 72, pp. 431–450.
Rao, C.R. (1970). “Estimation of Heteroscedastic Variances in Linear Models”. Jour-
nal of the American Statistical Association, 65, pp. 161–172.
Wu, C.F.J. and Hamada, M.S. (2000). Experiments: Planning, Analysis, and Pa-
rameter Design Optimization. John Wiley and Sons, Hoboken, NJ.
22

Ye, K., and Hamada, M. (2000). “Critical Values of the Lenth Method for Unrepli-
cated Factorial Designs”. Journal of Quality Technology, 32, pp. 57–66.
Ye, K.Q., Hamada, M., and Wu, C.F.J. (2001). “A Step-Down Lenth Method for An-
alyzing Unreplicated Factorial Designs”. Journal of Quality Technology, 33, pp. 140–
152.
Zahn, D.A. (1975). “Modifications and Revised Critical Values for the Half-Normal
Plot”. Technometrics, 17, pp. 189–200.
Zhang, Y. (2010). “A Comparison of Location Effect Identification Methods for Un-
replicated Fractional Factorials in the Presence of Dispersion Effects”. MSc. Thesis,
Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.
23