Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Okiriguo (2019) 12 (1): 7 – 15                        DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3820631 
 
Research Article 
 
Determination of the Nutritional and Anti-nutritional Compositions of Bitter Kola 
(Garcinia kola) 
 
1*OkiriguoVivan Ifeoma and 2Daniel Okiriguo 
1Department of Science Laboratory Technology, Delta State School of Marine 
Technology, P.M.B 1060, Burutu- Nigeria. 
2Department of Chemistry, Federal University of Petroleum Resources, P.M.B 1221, 
Effurun, Delta State, Nigeria. 
*Corresponding Author’s E-mail okiriguov@gmail.com. 
 
Abstract 
 
The  nutritional  and  anti-nutritional  compositions  of  Garcinia  kola  were  determined  using 
standard  methods  of  the  Association  of  Official  Analytical  Chemist  (AOAC).  The  results 
revealed moisture (57.42±0.04), dry matter (40.53±0.02), crude fat (4.19±0.35), crude protein 
(2.47±0.09), ash (0.92±0.004), and total carbohydrates, (26.49±0.04) respectively. Fe was the 
most abundant element in Garcinia kola seed (18.14 mg100 g-1), followed by K (2.51 mg100 g-1). 
Also Co (2.01 mg100 g-1) and Zn (2.31 mg100 g-1) were detected. Mn and Co were available at 
low values. However, Cr was not detected (ND).    The results of the preliminary photochemical 
screening of the extracts of bitter kola    reveal the presence of bioactive substances.    Results 
obtained were comparable to results obtained by other authors. From the parameters determined, 
it shows the sample can act as antioxidants, anticancer, anti viral, anti inflammatory, and anti 
allergic due to the results obtained. 
. 
Keywords: Nutritional, Mineral, Antibiotics, Herbal, Stimulants, Medicinal, Toxicity, 
Constituents.   
 
Received: 12/01/19                                                              Accepted: 18/04/19 
 
Introduction 
Garcinia kola (bitter kola) is a dicotyledonous plant having a place with the group of plant 
called Gutiferae. It is an enduring yield developing in the timberland, disseminated west 
and focal Africa (Iwu 1993). Bitter kola is a mainstream rural   
This work is licensed under a Creative Co7m  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Okiriguo (2019) 12 (1): 7 – 15 
produce accessible in enormous amount in West Africa especially in Nigeria and it is a 
plant  that  develops  in  the  rainforest.  It  is  utilized  widely  in  the readiness  of natural 
medications either as energizer, supplement or as home grown cures also. Harsh kola 
has  been  recognized  as  a  powerful  anti-infection  which  could  be  compelling  in  the 
treatment  of  numerous  maladies.  It  is  assessed  that  over  70%  of  present  day 
pharmaceutical items depend on herb. The natural product, seed, nuts, and bark of the 
plant have been utilized for quite a long time in medication to treat infirmity from hacks, 
fever, the runs, tuberculosis and other bacterial diseases. It assists with detoxifying the 
framework  Garcinia  kola  plant  is  a  plant  inferred  medication  which  has  numerous 
advantages,  for  example,  low  harmfulness  status/relative  wellbeing,  openness  and 
reasonableness. Plant parts have been a wellspring of home grown medication which 
has been demonstrated to be powerful to about 80% of populace as essential medicinal 
services use (Igboko, 1983, Sodipo and Akiniyi, 2000).   
Reports have been made by a few creators on severe kola, Dah-Nouvlessounon et al. 
(2015) announced healthful and hostile to supplement organization of three Kola nuts 
acquired  in  Benin,  Akpakpan  et  al.  (2020)  wrote  about  phytochemical  screening  and 
explanatory evaluation of corrosive base pointer properties of red and white kola nuts 
concentrates,  Adeniyi  et  al.  (2017)  looked  into  on  the  relative  investigation  of  the 
proximate and unsaturated fat profiles of Cola nitida, Cola acuminata and Garcinia kola, 
Odebunmi et al. (2009) chipped away at the proximate and healthful structure of kola nut 
(Cola nitida), bitter cola (Garcinia cola) and crocodile pepper (Afromomum melegueta), 
while Onyekwelu et al. (2015) focused on cancer prevention agent, dietary and hostile to 
wholesome  arrangement  of  Garcinia  kola  and  Chrysophyllum  albidum  from  rainforest 
biological system of Ondo State, Nigeria, however very little was done on the nourishing 
and antinutritional estimations of Garcinia kola. This work was set out upon to create 
more  data  on  severe  kola.  In  the  light  of  this,  the  proximate,  minerals,  and 
phytochemical constituents of seeds of Garcinia kola got in Warri, Delta State, Nigeria 
were resolved.   
Materials and Methods 
The  Garcinia  kola  (Bitter  kola)  were  newly  gathered  and  bought  from  neighborhood 
ranchers at the Warri showcase in Delta State, Nigeria. The Garcinia kola was enveloped 
by dry banana leaves (conventional technique) for 3 weeks. The dried (sun dried) seeds 
tests were ground utilizing research center mortar and pestle kept in a polythene sack 
and put away in hermetically sealed containers till investigations.   
Proximate Content Determination 
Standard methods of the Association of Official Analytical Chemist (AOAC, 1990) were 
used to determine the moisture, crude protein, crude fat, total ash and crude fiber   
This work is licensed under a Creative Co8m  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Okiriguo (2019) 12 (1): 7 – 15 
 
contents of the sample. Moisture content was determined by heating 2.0g of each sample 
to a constant weight in a crucible placed in an oven maintained at 105o C. The dry matter 
was used in the determination of the other parameters. Crude protein (% total nitrogen x 
6.25) was also determined by the Kjeldahl method, using 2.0g samples, crude fat were 
obtained  by  exhaustively  extracting  5.0g  of  the  sample  in  a  soxhlet  apparatus  using 
petroleum boiling point range 40-600 C as the extract. Ash content was determined by the 
incineration of 10.0g samples placed in a muffle furnace maintained at 550o C for 5 h. 
Crude  fiber  was  obtained  by  digesting  2.0g  of  samples  with  H SO   and  NaOH  and 
2 4
incinerating the residue in obtained a muffle furnace maintained at 550o C for 5 h, total 
carbohydrate was obtained by different method; each analysis was carried out in two 
places. 
 
Mineral Content Determination 
The  mineral  contents  of  sample  were  determined  by  atomic  absorption 
spectrophotometry (Shimadzu AA-670) after dry ashing of the samples. The ash sample 
was transferred quantitatively into a conical flask and dissolved in l0 cm3 of 3% Ferric 
chloride  and  the  mixture  was  heated  on  a  hot  plate,  then  filtered  into  a  100  cm3 
volumetric flask and made up to the mark with distilled water. The mineral contents 
(Potassium,  Calcium,  Magnesium,  Iron,  Zinc,  Manganese  and  Phosphorus)  of  the 
solution were determined using atomic absorption spectrometer.   
 
Data obtained were generated in triplicates and analyzed, using Minitab 16 Statistical 
Software. 
 
Anti-nutrients 
This aspect of analysis was performed qualitatively (Cannell, 1998) 
 
Test for Tannins   
About  0.5g  of  the  ground  sample  of  Garcinia  kola  was  boiled  in  20ml  of  water  in  a 
separate test tube and then filtered. A few drop of 0.1% FeCl  was added and observed 
3
for brownish green or blue black.   
 
Test for Phlobatannin 
An aqueous extract of the plant sample of Garcinia kola (bitter cola) was boiled with 1% 
aqueous HCl and deposition of a red precipitate was taken as evidence for the presence 
of phlobatannin. 
 
 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co9m  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Okiriguo (2019) 12 (1): 7 – 15 
 
Test for Saponins 
The powdered sample Garcinia kola (2g) was boiled in 20ml of distilled water in a water 
bath and filtered. 10 cm3 of the filtrate was mixed with 5 cm3 of distilled water and 
shaken vigorously for a stable resistant froth. The frothing was mixed with 3 drops of 
olive oil, shaken vigorously and then observed for the formation of emulsion. 
 
Test for Flavonoids   
A 5 cm3 of 10% dilute ammonia solution was added to a portion of the aqueous filtrate of 
the extract, followed by addition of concentrated H SO . A yellow coloration observed 
2 4
indicated the presence of flavonoid. 
 
Test for Cardiac Glycosides   
A 5 cm3 of the extract was treated with 2 cm3 of glacial acetic acid containing 1 drop of 
FeCl  solution (0.1%). This was underlayed with 1ml of concentrated H SO . A brown 
3 2 4
ring of the interface indicates deoxysugar characteristics of cardenolides. A violet ring 
may appear below the brown ring, while in the acetic layer, a greenish ring may form 
just gradually throughout thin layer. 
 
Preparation of Fat Free Samples 
A  2  g  of  the  sample  were  defatted  with  100  cm3    of  diethyl  either  using  a  soxhlet 
apparatus for 2 h. 
 
Determination of Total Phenols by Spectrometer Method   
For the extraction of the phenolic component, the fat free samples of the plant were 
boiled with 25 cm3 of ether for 15 min.    A 2.5 cm3 of the extract was pipetted into a 25 
cm3 flask, and then 5 cm3 of distilled water was added to 1 cm3 of ammonium hydroxide 
solution and 2.5 cm3 of concentrated alcohol were also added. The sample was left to 
react for 30 min for colour development. The absorbance of the solution was read using a 
UV/Vis spectrophotometer (Mettler Toledo, Model UV 5 ) at 505 mm wave lengths as 
described by Obadoni and Ochuko (2001).   
 
The  results  of  the  preliminary  photochemical  screening  of  the  extracts  of  bitter  kola   
reveal the presence of bioactive substances. Results obtained were comparable to results 
obtained  by  Faruq  et  al.  (2004);  Ogukwe  et  al.  (2004);  Akpan  and  Udoh  (2004),  and 
Abulude (2007) for extract of Senna italica, Sansevieria trifasciata, Raphia hookeri, and some 
woody plants leaves respectively.     
 
 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co1m0  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Okiriguo (2019) 12 (1): 7 – 15 
 
Results and Discussion 
 
Table 1: Nutritional Composition (%) of Garcinia kola 
 
Parameters  Garcinia kola 
Moisture    57.42±0.04 
Dry  40.53±0.02 
Crude fat  4.19±0.35 
Crude protein  2.47±0.09 
Ash    0.92±0.004 
Crude fibre  5.03±0.13 
Total carbohydrate  26.49±0.64 
 
Table 1 shows the moisture content to be 57.42 (%) and its dry matter was 40.53 % The 
crude fat, crude protein, crude fiber, crude and total carbohydrate were 26.49, 4.19, 2.47, 
5.03,  0.92,  and  0.92  %  respectively.  These  qualities  are  comparative  from  what  had 
recently  been  accounted  for  Garcinia  kola  (Odebunmi  et al.,  2009), they  examined  the 
proximate and wholesome organization of kolanut (Cola nitida), severe cola (Garcinia kola) 
and gator pepper (Aframomu melegueta) and announced a protein substance of 2.48%, 
fluid 4.51%, debris of 0.79% and rough strands substance of 5.23% in the seed and the 
report of Alaje et al. (2014). The shifting creation revealed by different examinations can 
be credited with season, condition and condition or time assessment.   
Table 2: Mineral Composition of Seed sample (mg100 g-1) 
M i ne ra l  Concentrations   
Magnesium    0.42 ± 0.30 
Calcium  1.86±0.42 
Potassium  2.51±0.12 
Phosphorous  0 . 3 3 ±0 . 1 0 
S o d i u m  0 . 7 2 ±0 . 1 0 
I r o n  1 8 . 1 4 ±0 . 2 0 
Z i n c  2 . 3 1 ±0 . 0 1 
M a n g a n e s e  0 . 7 8 ±0 . 2 0 
C o p p e r  2 . 0 1 ±0 . 5 0 
C h r o m i u m  N D 
C o b a l t  0 . 5 5 ±0 . 2 0 
C a d m i u m  0 . 2 9 ±0 . 1 0 
ND - Not Detectable 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co1m1  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Okiriguo (2019) 12 (1): 7 – 15 
 
Table  2  shows  the  consequences  of  the  mineral  piece.  Fe  was  the  most  copious 
component accessible in Garcinia kola seed (18.14 mg100 g-1), trailed by K (2.51 mg100 g-1). 
Additionally Co (2.01 mg100 g-1) and Zn (2.31 mg100 g-1) were distinguished. Mn and Co 
were accessible at low qualities. Be that as it may, Cr was not identified in Garcinia kola. 
The  aftereffects  of  the  mineral  organizations  may  demonstrate  that  severe  kola  are 
plentiful as far as mineral components. This becomes significant when minerals like P, 
Ca, Mg, K, Fe, and Zn are required in the body. The Zn substance could imply that the 
seeds can assume a significant job in the administration of diabetes, which results from 
insulin failing. Zn is fundamental for the creation of insulin, a hormone and carbonic 
anhydrase, a catalyst in the body (Okwu, 2004). Fe is a segment of hemoglobin. It enables 
oxygen to move, together with hemoglobin and ferrodizin, it assumes significant job in 
man's digestion (Okwu, 2004).   
Clearly  seed  aggregates  fundamental,  significant,  vital,  valuable  and  accommodating 
components for plant, man and creatures. The nearness of Ca2+, Mg2+, Na+, K+, Co3+, 
Cr3+, Cu2+, Fe2+, Mn2+, Ni2+ and Zn2+ reflects their capacity as fundamental supplement 
components,  frequently  as  co-calculate  activators  metal-ligand  compound  edifices 
(Valkovic,  1975).  Ca2+and  Mg2+are  present  in  replaceable  sums  and  go  about  as 
restricting operators to meld the cell dividers together (Dser, 1979). The high grouping of 
specific metals, Mg2+, K+, Ca2+and Fe2+ in the plants are basic for legitimate development 
and  ordinary  working  of  the  plant  (Underwood,  1971).  Co3+,  Cr2+,  Cu2+and  Zn2+ 
(Valkovic, 1975) are fundamental for hair development and for expanding the pace of 
milk creation by pregnant females.   
In any case, the lower Na substance of Garcinia kola may be a favorable position because 
of the immediate relationship of sodium admission with hypertension in human (Dahl, 
1972). Garcinia kola seeds are rich in phytonutrient, for example, flavonoids, phenolic 
compound, tannins, saponin, terpernoids, cardiovascular glycosides and alkaloids.   
The  organic  elements  of  flavonoids  incorporates  insurance  against  platelet  ulcers, 
infections, and tumors (Okwu, 2004). This might be the explanation for the utilization of 
concentrates of this plant in the treatment of intestinal difficulties in natural medication 
(Okwu and Omodamiro, 2005), the nearness of phenolic mixes in the seed of Garcinia kola 
shows  that  this  plant  may  be  an  antimicrobial  operator.  This  is  on  the  grounds  that 
phenols and phenolic mixes have been widely utilized in sanitization and remain the 
standard  with  which  different  bactericides  are  looked  at.  Phenolic  mixes  as  electron 
benefactors  are  promptly  oxidized  from  phenolate  particle  or  quinine,  an  electron 
acceptor.  This  offers  ascend  to  down  to  earth  employments.  Protonated  phenol  is 
utilized as cleaning specialist. Concentrates from Garcinia kola subsequently have strong   
This work is licensed under a Creative Co1m2  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Okiriguo (2019) 12 (1): 7 – 15 
 
bactericidal  properties  (Okwu  and  Omodamiro,  2005).  These  discoveries  upheld  the 
utilization of concentrate from Garcinia kola in forestalling the arrangement of wound 
diseases  and  furthermore  in  treating  wounds  that  not  just  recuperates  quick  (Okwu, 
2004).   
Phytochemicals have been found to restrain microbes, parasites, infections and bugs. 
The nearness of phytochemicals in the foundation of Garcinia kola might be liable for the 
antibacterial  movement  of  the  plant  (Margorie,  1999),  for  example,  the  nearness  of 
tannins  in  plants  removes  which  is  known  to  have  antibacterial  and  antifungal 
properties may give the opportunity for customary specialists to utilize it as solutions for 
fever and cerebral pain, seizures and stomach issue.   
This somewhat clarified the utilization of these seed materials in natural medication, as 
rich  wellsprings  of  phytochemicals  combined  with  the  nearness  of  the  fundamental 
nutrients and minerals. Garcinia kola seeds can be viewed as a potential wellspring of 
helpful nourishments and medications detailing. The employments of these plants for 
the  treatment  of  the  infection  as  guaranteed  by  customary  healer  are  likewise  being 
examined.   
Conclusion 
Garcinia kola is plentiful in supplement and mineral pieces. It very well may be of huge 
use  in  phytomedicine  and  can  be  remembered  for  medicinal  services  conveyance 
framework especially in the creating economy. It tends to be finished up from thiThis 
implies that residents of Burutu town are constantly faced with health risks associated 
with  the  consumption  and  utilization  of  contaminated  water  obtained  from  these 
sources.   
 
References 
 
Abulude, F.O. (2007). Phytochemical screening and mineral contents of leaves of some Nigerian 
woody plants. Res. J. Phytochem 1(1):33-39. 
 
Adeyeye Adeniyi, Ayodele Olufunmilayo Deborah, Akinnuoye Gentle Akinnuoye 
(2017). Comparative Study of the Proximate and Fatty Acid Profiles of Cola nitida, Cola 
acuminata and Garcinia kola. American Journal of Food Science and Nutrition. Vol. 4, No. 6: 
80-84. 
 
 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co1m3  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Okiriguo (2019) 12 (1): 7 – 15 
 
Akpan E. J. and Usoh I. F. (2004): Phytochemical screening and effect of aqueous root 
extract of Raphia hooekri (raffia palm) on metabolic clearance rate of ethanol in rabbits. 
Biokemistri 16 (1): 37-42. 
 
Akpakpan,  A.E.,  Uwanta,  E.J.,  Akpan,  P.E.,  and  Owen,  A.E.  (2020).  phytochemical 
screening and analytical assessment of acid-base indicator properties of red and white 
kola nuts extracts. Asian Journal of Advances in Research 3(1): 1-7, 2020. 
 
Alaje, D.O., Owolabi, K.T., Olakunle, T.P., Oluoti, O.J., and Adetuberu I.A. (2014). 
Nutritional minerals and phytochemical composition of Garcinia cola (Bitter cola) and 
Aframomum melegueta (Alligator pepper) Journal of Environmental Science, Toxicology 
and Food Technology (IOSR-JESTFT).    8, (1), PP 86-91. 
 
AOAC (1990). Official methods of Analytical Chemist, Washington, DC. 
 
Cannell  R.  J.  P.  ed.  (1998):  Natural  products  isolation  in:  Methods  in  Biotechnology, 
Human Press, Totowa, New Jersey. pp. 343-363. 
 
Dahl, L.K (1972). Salt and Hypertension. America J. Clin. Nutr., 25:231-238. 
 
Dah-Nouvlessounon, D. , Adjanohoun, A. , Sina, H. , Noumavo, P. , Diarrasouba, N. , 
Parkouda,  C.  ,  Madodé,  Y.  ,  Dicko,  M.  and  Baba-Moussa,  L.  (2015)  Nutritional  and 
Anti-Nutrient Composition of Three Kola Nuts ( Cola nitida, Cola acuminata and Garcinia 
kola)  Produced  in  Benin. Food  and  Nutrition  Sciences, 6,  1395-1407. 
doi: 10.4236/fns.2015.615145. 
 
Dser BL (1979). Hawk's Physiological Chemistry, Edn. 4. New Delhi: Tate McGraw-Hill 
Publ. Co. pp. 27-133.   
 
Faruq  U.  Z.,  Adul-malik  M.  and  Dabai  Y.  U.  (2004):  Antibacterial  activity  of  crude 
anthraquinone extract of Senna italica leaves. Biosci. Res. Comm. 16 (1): 7-11. 
 
Igboko, D.O, (1983) Phytochemical studies on Garcinia Kola Heckel. M.Sc.   Thesis. 
University of Nigeria Nsukka Nigeria, Pp: 202. 
 
Iwu, M. 1993. Handbook of African medicinal plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL. 
 
Margorie, M.C (1999): Plant products as antimicrobial agents. Clinical Microbiology, 12 
(4), 564582. 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co1m4  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

| Dah-Nouvlessounon, D. , Adjanohoun, A. , Sina, H. , Noumavo, P. , Diarrasouba, N. ,     |
|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Parkouda, C. , Madodé, Y. , Dicko, M. and Baba-Moussa, L. (2015) Nutritional and        |
| Anti-Nutrient Composition of Three Kola Nuts ( Cola nitida, Cola acuminata and Garcinia |
| kola) Produced in Benin. Food and Nutrition Sciences, 6, 1395-1407.                     |
| doi: 10.4236/fns.2015.615145.                                                           |

Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Okiriguo (2019) 12 (1): 7 – 15 
 
Obadoni B.O., P.O. Ochuko. (2001). Phytochemical studies and cooperative efficacy of 
the crude extract of some homeostatic plant in Edo and Delta State of Nigeria. Global 
J. Pure and Applied Science, 8:203-208. 
 
Odebunmi, E.O, Oluwaniyi, O.O., Awolola G.V. and Adediji O.O. (2009). Proximate and 
nutritional composition of kolanut (Cola nitida), bitter cola (Garcinia kola) and alligator 
pepper (Aframomum melegueta). Polish African Journal of Biotechnology 8(2). 308-310 
 
Ogukwe  C.  E.,  Oguzie  E.  E.,  Uneagbu  C.  and  Okolue  B.  N.  (2004):  Phytochemcial 
screening of the leaves of Sansevieria trifasciata. J. Chem. Soc. Nig. 29(1): 8-10.   
 
Okwu  D.E  and  O.D  Omodamiro,  (2005).  Effect  of  hexane  extract  and  phytochemical 
content  of  Xcylopia  acthiopica  and  Ocimum  gratissimum  on  the  uterus  of  Guinea  pig. 
Bio-Research Vol. 3(2) 2005: 40-44. 
 
Okwu, D.E, (2004). Phytochemicals and vitamin content of indigenous spices of South 
Eastern Nigeria. J. Sustain Agric. Environ., 6: 30-34. 
 
Onyekwelu,  J.  C,  Oyewale,  O.,  Stimm,  B.,  and  Mosandl,  R.  (2015).  Antioxidant, 
nutritional and anti-nutritional composition of Garcinia kola and Chrysophyllum albidum 
from rainforest ecosystem of Ondo State, Nigeria. Journal of Forestry Research, 26, 417-424. 
doi: 10.1007/s11676-015-0068-2. 
 
Sodipo, O.A and J.A Akiniyi, (2000). Studies on certain characteristics of extract    from 
back  of  Palmsinys  taliamacruceras  (K.schum)  Pierre  Esbeille.  Global  J.  Pure  and  Applied 
Science, 6:83-87. 
 
Underwood EJ (1971). Trace Elements in Human and Mineral Nutrition. New York: 
Academic Press. pp. 6-120.   
 
Valkovic VV (1975). Trace Element Analysis. London: Taylor and Francis. pp. 5-83.   
 
 
 
 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co1m5  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

| Onyekwelu, J. C, Oyewale, O., Stimm, B., and Mosandl, R. (2015). Antioxidant,               |
|:--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| nutritional and anti-nutritional composition of Garcinia kola and Chrysophyllum albidum     |
| from rainforest ecosystem of Ondo State, Nigeria. Journal of Forestry Research, 26, 417-424 |
| doi: 10.1007/s11676-015-0068-2.                                                             |

Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Ovovwe (2019) 12 (1): 16 – 23                              DOI:   
 
Short Communication 
 
Microbiological Assessment of Well Water Obtained in Burutu Town, Delta State, 
Nigeria 
 
Okiriguo Vivian Ifeoma* and Diakparomre Ovovwe 
Department of Science Laboratory Technology, Delta State School of Marine 
Technology, P.M.B.1060, Burutu, Delta State, Nigeria. 
*Corresponding author: okiriguov@gmail.com 
 
Abstract 
 
This study was carried out to assess the microbial quality of ground water sources (well water) 
in Burutu town. Five randomly selected wells from five(5) areas of the town were selected and 
water  samples  obtained.  The  samples  were  subjected  to  standard  methods  of  analysis.  The 
results  showed  that  the  total  coliform  present  in  the  water  samples  ranged  from  2204 
cfu/100ml  to  2477  cf/100ml.  These  values  are  far  above  the  World  Health  Organization 
(WHO) standard of 0cfu/100ml (absence of coliform) for safe potable water. These values may 
be  as  a  result  of  poor  groundwater  source  (well)  construction,  poor  handling  and  lack  of 
maintenance. Individuals who utilize water from these wells for consumption and domestics 
purposes are at risk of contacting water borne diseases if not properly treated before use.   
 
Keywords: Ground water, Glaziers, ice caps, Water borne disease, Analysis and Microbes. 
 
  Received: 12/04/19                                  Accepted: 18/07/19 
 
Introduction 
 
Water is viewed as the dissolvable of life (Reece et al., 2013), as it is fundamental for the 
endurance of each type of life, and the requirement for water is continually expanding 
because  of  high  paces  of  populace  development  and  urbanization.  In  any  case,  the 
expanded requests for water for drinking, residential, agrarian and modern procedures 
are  not  equivalent  with  water  accessible,  accordingly  presenting  critical  dangers  in 
keeping up worthy water quality (DESA, 2008). It is believed that by the year 2025, the 
greater  part  of  the  total  populace  would  be  confronted  with  water-based  weakness 
(Kulshreshthan, 1998). Water is an all inclusive and significant dissolvable required   
This work is licensed under a Creative Co1m6  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Ovovwe (2019) 12 (1): 16 – 23 
 
throughout  everyday  life.  It  has  numerous  utilization  relying  upon  needs  of  people. 
Water covers over 70% of the world's surface. It makes what we call groundwater and 
surface water, for example, well, waterway, downpour, stream, and so on (Fashae et al., 
2017; Herman, 2009, 2010; Khongwir et al., 2014; Slimani and Kalla, 2017; Yasin et al., 
2015).  According  to  the  Water  Project  (2016), WHO  (2016), UNDP  (2014) and  Living 
Water Africa (2016), about one billion people do not have access to clean and save water.   
In many places of the world, access to water has been potentially a critical  factor in 
alleviating poverty and enhancement of economic growth.   
 
Groundwater represents an important source of water and constitutes the largest source 
of dug well water, as well as borehole water. Water from these shallow and profound 
wells  is  frequently  of preferable  quality over  surface  vast  water  source;  if  the  dirt  is 
fine-grained and its bedrocks don't have breaks, hole and bedding plants which license 
the free section of contamination water. The accessibility and virtue of groundwater are 
influenced  by  area,  development  and  activity  of  wells.  It  is  regularly  expected  that 
common uncontaminated water from profound wells is spotless and solid, and this is 
normally evident with respect to bacteriological synthesis.   
 
There  are  numerous  wellsprings  of  water  defilement,  notwithstanding,  the  vast 
majority of them are arranged or ordered into two gatherings, specifically: immediate 
and  roundabout  sources.  The  immediate  sources  incorporate  profluent  outfalls  and 
squanders  from  industrial  facilities,  processing  plants  squander  treatment  plants, 
sewage treatment plants, and horticultural practices (manures and pesticides), and so 
on,  that  produces  liquids  of  different  characteristics  legitimately  into  urban  water 
supplies. Backhanded sources incorporate sources incorporate contaminants that enter 
the water gracefully from soils or underground frameworks and from the air by means 
of downpour water and human practices, (for example, vaporous oversights from autos, 
industrial facilities and even pastry kitchens).   
 
Different wellsprings of water defilement emerge from the poor development, absence 
of  support  and  poor  treatment  of  water  gracefully  frameworks,  particularly  ground 
water, (for example, wells and boreholes).   
 
The nature of water from ground or surface can be affected anytime by the lithology of 
the bowl, environmental, climatic, and anthropogenic information sources (Shrestha et 
al., 2008; Al Aizari et al., 2017). Tainting of water are from anthropogenic sources of info 
which  are  man-produced  using  urban,  modern  and  agrarian  exercises,  traffic,  and 
expanding utilization of water assets) and furthermore from common procedures which 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co1m7  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

remember  changes  for  precipitation  inputs,  disintegration,  enduring  of  crustal 
materials.   
Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Ovovwe (2019) 12 (1): 16 – 23 
 
Tainting  of  water  debilitates  its  utilization  for  drinking,  modern,  rural,  diversion  or 
different purposes (Muangthon, 2015).   
 
Defilement of water is related gastrointestinal disease in people, with sickness, retching, 
and  additionally  looseness  of the  bowels,  pneumonia  (Yu, 2000;  Ahmed  et  al.,  2010), 
dreariness among small kids (Heyworth et al., 2006), typhoid fever, cholera, hepatitis A, 
flu, dengue, and leptospirosis (Rappler, 2015).   
 
All  through  the  world,  a  few  research  works  have  been  done.  Ahmed  et  al.  (2010) 
decided  the  microbial  dangers  of  water  acquired  in  Australia,  Al  Aizari  et  al.  (2017) 
evaluated  the  nature  of  groundwater  in  Dhamar  City,  Yemen,  Budiwati  et  al.  (2016) 
chipped  away  at  the  synthetic  qualities  of  water  in  Sumatera,  Indonesia,  same  was 
recorded  for  Nigeria  (Bada  et  al.,  2012;  Abulude  et  al.,  2017).  No  records  of  such 
evaluations  were  found  for  ground  water  in  Buruku  town  in  Nigeria.  It  won't  be 
strange if the water found in this area is assessed for its quality.   
 
Some portion of the 2030 Agenda is Good Health and Well-being (Goal 3) and Clean 
Water  and  Sanitation  (Goal  6)  (UN,  2018).  These  imply  that  there  must  be  water 
accessible  for  utilize  each  season  and  should  be  spotless  and  solid  for  use.  This 
motivation can't be accomplished if groundwater isn't kept sterile. Not all waters can be 
put away particularly whenever debased (truly, artificially, and microbiologically) and 
steady checking must be guaranteed. Before water can be tanked or saved for sometime 
later,  the  quality  should  initially  be  determined.  It  is  on  this  reason  our  exploration 
depended on the evaluation of the nature of well water in Burutu town dependent on 
the microbiological properties.   
 
The reason of this paper was to determine the microbiological constituents of well water 
got in Burutu Town, Delta State, Nigeria.   
 
Materials and Methods 
 
The  well  water  was  obtained  in  five  extraordinary  (Amba,  Okorodudu,  Low  Beach, 
Quarters,  and  Court  street)  zones  in  Burutu  town,  Delta  State  with  plastic  pails 
pre-washed with dilute HCl, flushed with refined water and later with a lot of water 
from the areas. The water was then moved into the plastic containers and secured after 
all the air bubbles had been wiped out. The samples were marked and sent to the lab for 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co1m8  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

examination  after  six  hours  of  assortment.  The  climate  around  there  is  a  tropical 
atmosphere which is made of downpour (April-October) and dry (November-March)   
 
Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Ovovwe (2019) 12 (1): 16 – 23 
 
seasons.  The  testing  locales  were  encircled  by  horticultural  fields,  trees,  private 
structures, untarred streets for vehicular exercises (low traffic), and homesteads.   
 
The nutrient agar was prepared by weighing 28g of the powdered nutrient agar and 
dissolving in 100ml of distilled water. The resulting solution was then heated to boiling 
point to dissolve the medium completely. It was then sterilized by autoclaving at 121O C 
(15 ibs pressure) for 15 minutes. The sterilized nutrient agar was then allowed to cool 
(50 O C). 
 
The determination of the total coliform in the water samples was carried out using the 
plate count method. The recently prepared warm molten nutrient agar was added to 
100ul (approximately 2 drops) of the water sample in a Petri dish and allowed to cool 
and solidify, after which it was inversely placed in the incubation period of 24 hours at 
37 O C.  At  the  end  of  the  incubation  period,  the  colonies  formed  were  counted  and 
recorded and their corresponding coliform forming units were recorded.   
 
Data obtained were generated in triplicates and analyzed, using Minitab 16 Statistical 
Software. 
   
Results and Discussion 
 
Table 1: Results obtained from the microbial analysis of water samples 
 
s/n    Location  of  Total  coliform  WHO  standard 
Groundwater  (cfu/100ml)  (cfu/100ml) 
source (Well) 
1  Amba  2380±0.06  0 
2  Okorodudu  2462±0.05  0 
3  Low Beach    2431±0.05  0 
4  Quarters  2477±0.08  0 
5  Court Road    2204±0.05  0 
 
 
 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co1m9  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

|   s/n | Location of     | Total coliform   |   WHO standard |
|       | Groundwater     | (cfu/100ml)      |    (cfu/100ml) |
|       | source (Well)   |                  |                |
|------:|:----------------|:-----------------|---------------:|
|     1 | Amba            | 2380±0.06        |              0 |
|     2 | Okorodudu       | 2462±0.05        |              0 |
|     3 | Low Beach       | 2431±0.05        |              0 |
|     4 | Quarters        | 2477±0.08        |              0 |
|     5 | Court Road      | 2204±0.05        |              0 |

 
 
 
Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Ovovwe (2019) 12 (1): 16 – 23 
 
 
 
Figure 1:    Comparison of test samples values with WHO standard values. 
 
Table 1 and Figure 1 portray the qualities acquired for the microbiological examinations 
in the investigation. The outcomes got show that the Total coliform in Quarters (2477 
cfu/100ml)  and  Okorodudu  (2462  cfu/100ml)  had  the  higher  qualities  compared  to 
those from different destinations (Amba, Low Beach, and Court Road, 2380, 2431, and 
2204 separately). In comparing with the WHO standard, the outcomes here are a lot 
higher.  This  uncovers  none  of  water  tests  satisfied  the  WHO  suggested  guideline  of 
0cfu/100ml for safe consumable drinking water.   
 
This  demonstrates  the  water  tests  acquired  from  individual  wells  are  defiled  with 
microbial  contaminants  and  represent  a  high  danger  of  transmitting  water-borne 
sicknesses because of the significant level of all out coliform. It subsequently shows that 
occupants and creatures of Burutu town who use such wells as wellspring of water for 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co2m0  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

utilization and for residential purposes face genuine wellbeing hazard emerging from 
the transmission of any at least one of the diverse water-borne illnesses.   
 
Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Ovovwe (2019) 12 (1): 16 – 23 
 
Conclusion 
 
Water  is  a  significant  asset  that  is  fundamental  forever,  populace  development  and 
urbanization  has  realized  a  regularly  expanding  interest  for  safe  consumable  water, 
particularly  in  numerous  networks  and  towns  in  creating  nations  has  prompted  the 
dependence  and  usage  of  dangerous  defiled  water.  Burutu  town  is  one  of  such 
networks, and occupants rely essentially upon well water as significant wellspring of 
water. From this examination, it has been uncovered that the well water in Burutu town 
are  anyway  exceptionally  tainted  with  all  out  coliform  that  far  surpasses  the  World 
Health  Organization  (WHO)  standard.  This  suggests  occupants  of  Burutu  town  are 
continually confronted with wellbeing dangers related with the utilization and usage of 
sullied water got from these sources.   
 
Recommendation 
 
Based on the findings of this study, the following recommendations were made: 
•  The consumption of water obtained from this the wells in Burutu town should be 
strictly avoided.   
•  The  periodic  availability  of  relatively  less  contaminated  sources  of  water  (eg. 
Rain water) should be harnessed by way of harvesting and storage.   
•  There is the need for the proper sitting and construction of wells 
•  The handling and maintenance of wells should be greatly improved upon Water 
treatment processes (such as filtration, chlorination, boiling, use of disinfectant, 
etc) should be carried out before utilization of the water.   
•  There should be safe potable water for residents of Burutu town. 
 
References 
 
Abulude, F. O., Ndamitso, M. M., and Abdulkadir, A (2017). Environmental Situation of 
an  Agricultural  Area  in  Akure,  Nigeria,  Based  on  Physico-Chemical  Properties  of 
Rainwater. Pollution, 4(2): 317-325, Spring 2018 DOI: 10.22059/poll.2017.242241.322. 
 
Ahmed W, Vieritz A, Goonetilleke A, and Gardner T (2010). Health Risk from the Use 
of  Roof-Harvested  Rainwater  in  Southeast  Queensland,  Australia,  as  Potable  or 
Nonpotable  Water,  Determined  Using  Quantitative  Microbial  Risk  Assessment.  Appl 
Environ Microbiol. 76(22): 7382–7391. 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co2m1  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

 
Al Aizari H, Labkiri A, Fadli M, Albaseer S (2017). Quality assessment of groundwater 
in Dhamar city, Yemen. Int. J. Environ., 6 (4): 56-71. 
Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Ovovwe (2019) 12 (1): 16 – 23 
 
Bada B. S., Olatunde K. A. and Bankole O. D. (2012). Chemical and Physical Properties 
of  Harvested  Rainwater  from  Different  Roofing  Sheets  in  Abeokuta,  Ogun  State. 
Hydrology for Disaster Management. Special Publication of the Nigerian Association of 
Hydrological Sciences. 173-170. 
 
Budiwati  Tuti,  Setyawati  Wiwiek,  and  Tanti  Dyah  Aries.  (2016).  Chemical 
Characteristics  of  Rainwater  in  Sumatera,  Indonesia,  during  2001–2010.  International 
Journal  of  Atmospheric  Sciences,  vol.  2016,  Article  ID  1876046,  11  pages,  2016. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/1876046. 
 
DESA,  (2008).  The  millennium  development  goals  report  2008.  United  Nations 
Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UN DESA), New York.   
 
Fashae O. A., Ayomanor R., Orimoogunje O. O. (2017), Land use dynamics and surface 
water quality in a typical urban centre of South-Western, Nigeria, Analele Universităţii 
din Oradea, Seria Geografie, 27(1), 98-107.   
 
Herman G. V. (2010), Using Geographical Information (GIS) System for Management of 
Flood Risks in the Somes Plain, in Cross-Border Partnership with Special Regard to the 
Hungarian - Romanian - Ukrainian Tripartite Border, Book Editors Ioan Horga, Istvan 
Suli Zakar, Publishing House University of Debrecen Press, p. 175 -179. 
 
Heyworth  J.S,  GlonekG,  MaynardEJ,  Baghurst  PA,  and  Finlay-Jones  J  (2006). 
Consumption of untreated tank rainwater and gastroenteritis among young children in 
South Australia. International Journal of Epidemiology, Volume 35, Issue 4, 1 August 2006, 
Pages 1051–1058, https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyl105. 
 
Khongwir  S.,  Shabong  D.  N.,  Jyrwa  L.  M.,  Dohling  B.,  Diengdoh  M.  (2014), 
Physico-chemical and  bacteriological analysis of river Umkhrah, Shilling, Meghalaya, 
India, Int. J. Res. Environ. Sci & Tech. 4(1), 1-5.   
 
Kulshreshtha,  S.N.  A  Global  Outlook  for  Water  Resources  to  the  Year  2025.  Water 
Resources Management 12, 167–184 (1998). https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1007957229865. 
 
Living  Water  Africa  (2018),  Water  poverty. 
https://www.livingwaterafrica.org.uk/water-poverty/. Accessed 10th January 2018 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co2m2  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

| Kulshreshtha, S.N. A Global Outlook for Water Resources to the Year 2025. Water   | None                                     |
|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-----------------------------------------|
| Resources Management 12, 167–184 (1998).                                          | https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1007957229865. |

 
 
 
Continental J. Biological Sciences 
Okiriguo and Ovovwe (2019) 12 (1): 16 – 23 
 
Muangthon, S. (2015). Assessment ecosystem of the Lamtakong River Basin (Thailand) 
using  multivariate  statistical  techniques.  Review  of  Integrative  Business  and  Economics 
Research. Vol 4:198- 216. 
 
Rappler  (2015).  What  are  the  common  rainy  season  diseases? 
https://www.rappler.com/move-ph/issues/disasters/102032-rainy-season-diseases-si
gns-prevention. Update 9th August 2015. 
 
Reece,  J.B.,  Urry  L.A.,  Cain  M.L.,  Wasserman  S.A.,  Minorsky  P.V.  and  Jackson  R.B. 
(2013). Champbell Biology (10th Edition). Pearson: Boston .p.    48. 
 
Shrestha, S.; Kazama, F. and Nakamura, T. (2008). Use of principal component analysis, 
factor analysis and discriminate analysis to evaluate spatial and temporal variations in 
water quality of the Mekong River. Journal of Hydroinformatics. 10(1): 43- 56. 
 
UN (2018). The 17 sustainable development goals (SDGs) to transform our world 
https://www.un.org/development/desa/disabilities/envision2030.html.  Accessed 
14th August 2018. 
 
Slimani  K.,  Kalla  M.  (2017),  Estimation  of  the  potential  vulnerability  to  floods  by 
“suitability  modeling”  method.  Case  of  Batna  City,  Northeast  of  Algeria.  Analele 
Universităţii din Oradea, Seria Geografie, 27(2), 164-174. 
 
UNDP  Human  Development  Report  (2014),  Sustaining  human  progress,  Reducing 
vulnerabilities and building resilience.   
 
The Water Project (2016), Poverty and water. The water project. Accessed 10th July 
2016. 
 
WHO (2016), Poverty. Health topics. (Updated). 
 
Yasin M., Ketema T., Bacha K. (2015), Physico-chemical and bacteriological quality of 
drinking  water  of  different  sources,  Jimma  zone,  Southwest  Ethiopia.  BMC  Research 
Notes, 8(1), 541 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co2m3  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 

Yu, V. L.(2000). Legionella pneumophila, p. 2424-2435. In G. L. Mandell, J. E. Bennett, and 
R. Dolin (ed.), Principles and practice of infectious diseases, 5th ed., vol. 2. Churchill 
Livingstone, Philadelphia, PA. 
   
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Co2m4  mons Attribution 3.0 Unported License 
ISSN: 2141 - 4203                            Science and Education Development Inst., Nigeria 
 
 