On the statistical interpretation of optical rogue waves
Miro Erkintalo and Go¨ery Genty
Tampere University of Technology, Institute of Physics, Optics Laboratory, FIN-33101
Tampere, Finland
0102 luJ 61  ]scitpo.scisyhp[  1v2872.7001:viXra
John M. Dudley
Institut FEMTO-ST, D´epartment d’Optique P. M. Duffieux, CNRS UMR 6174,
Universit´e de Franche-Comt´e, 25030 Besan¸con, France
Corresponding author: miro.erkintalo@tut.fi
Numerical simulations are used to discuss various aspects of “optical rogue
wave” statistics observed in noise-driven fiber supercontinuum generation
associated with highly incoherent spectra. In particular, we consider how long
wavelength spectral filtering influences the characteristics of the statistical
distribution of peak power, and we contrast the statistics of the spectrally
filtered SC with the statistics of both the peak power of the most red-shifted
soliton in the SC and the maximum peak power across the full temporal field
with no spectral selection. For the latter case, we show that the unfiltered
statistical distribution can still exhibit a long-tail, but the extreme-events in
this case correspond to collisions between solitons of different frequencies.
These results confirm the importance of collision dynamics in supercontinuum
generation. We also show that the collision-induced events satisfy an extended
hydrodynamic definition of “rogue wave” characteristics. (cid:13)c 2018 Optical
Society of America
1

1. Introduction
Nonlinear dynamical systems are often associated with extreme sensitivity to initial condi-
tions and the exponential divergence of two arbitrary close inputs [1]. In the optical context a
significant example of such a system is the propagation of energetic optical pulses in a highly
nonlinear fiber that leads to the generation of a white-light supercontinuum (SC) [2]. Indeed,
it has been known for some time that noise can cause significant SC fluctuations [3–6] and
indeed noise-induced bifurcation-like divergence of different phase trajectories in SC gener-
ation has been demonstrated explicitly in stochastic simulations (see Fig. 18 of Ref. 2). In
most studies, however, the fundamental aspects of these noise characteristics have not been
the main area of study; work has focussed more on identifying useful parameter regimes
where the noise can be reduced to acceptable levels for applications such as the important
area of optical frequency metrology [7].
Recent studies, however, have provided significantly new insight into the characteristics of
SC noise, and reinvigorated fundamental research into its origin. These studies were initiated
by an important paper by Solli et al. who pointed out that it was possible to directly
determine the statistics of peak power fluctuations across specific wavelength bands of the
broadband SC spectrum measured at the fiber output [8]. In particular, by isolating shot-
to-shot fluctuations on the long wavelength edge of the spectrum, they measured long-tailed
distributions of peak power, associated with the generation of a small number of high power
events appearing as rare outcomes from an ensemble of initial conditions that were identical
apart from low amplitude noise. An analogy with the “rogue waves” of oceanic infamy was
drawn, and these results stimulated further studies in an optical context, with numerical
studies and experiments studying SC statistics over a wider parameter range, including
femtosecond and continuous wave excitation [9–12]. Other work has made links between the
SC instabilities and the wider field of soliton turbulence [13–15]. Of course, many additional
recent advances are covered in other papers in this Special Issue.
When filtering on the long wavelength edge of the output SC and measuring subsequent
statistics, an association has been made between the high power events in the statistical dis-
tribution and solitons that have undergone “larger than average” frequency shifts through
the Raman soliton self-frequency shift (SSFS). Indeed, some of us have previously carried out
explicit studies examining the propagation dynamics of these “rogue soliton” events in more
detail in order to attempt to determine particular characteristics underlying their extended
frequency shifts [9]. More recent work has looked further at the initial stages of soliton emer-
gence from a phase of modulation instability where the pulse localisation can be described in
terms of Akhmediev “breather” characteristics [16,17]. Interestingly, the intrinsic statistics
of Akhmediev breather evolution before the onset of any SC-like broadband spectral gener-
ation has also been the subject of study in the context of optical and hydrodynamic rogue
2

waves [18] and the role of collisions has shown to be very important in generating statistical
distributions with extended tails [19]. Significantly, oceanic studies have also pointed out
the importance of wave-crossing and interactions in generating large amplitude waves via
nonlinear mechanisms [20,21].
In this paper, our goal is to further consider these aspects of the statistical analysis of SC
noise for the case of high soliton number (N > 100) excitation in the picosecond regime.
Although some of the conclusions drawn may well be very general and apply to other regimes
of noise-driven SC generation, the dynamics are complex and more case-by-case studies
will likely necessary in order to develop a fully unified picture. For our parameters, our
first main result is that whilst the tails of distributions obtained with long pass filtering
can indeed include some distinct solitons that have undergone larger than average Raman
frequency shifts, the filtering procedure introduces significant spectral clipping on solitons
further from the SC edge. An analysis of the peak power distribution of the most red-shifted
soliton without spectral filtering remains skewed, but significantly less so than the L-shaped
distribution obtained with filtering. A related result that we obtain is that the distribution
of SSFS wavelengths is Gaussian and does not exhibit long-tailed characteristics. These
results may have significant impact on the precise way the spectral filtering and associated
measurements on SC spectra should be interpreted in the context of understanding soliton
dynamics and studies of optical rogue waves. Our second main result concerns the statistics of
the peak powers of all solitons present on the temporal profile at the fiber output without any
wavelength selection at all. Analysing the peak power distribution in this case, we consider
how a commonly used definition of “rogue waves” used in hydrodynamics selects out a very
small number of highest-amplitude pulses arising from soliton collisions occurring at the
fiber output. This study confirms earlier suggestions of the importance of collision events
in SC generation [22,23] and in rogue soliton propagation [10]. Indeed, it may well be that
our results point to collision dynamics as a primary and general mechanism for rogue wave
formation in many other systems. Indeed, within an optical context, investigating the details
of collision dynamics in SC generation is an area of current activity [12,24].
2. Illustrative Numerical Results
Our numerical simulations are based on a generalized NLSE model which has been shown
to correctly reproduce the nonlinear propagation of broadband pulses [2]:
∂A (cid:88) ik+1 ∂kA (cid:18) ∂ (cid:19)(cid:18) (cid:90) ∞ (cid:19)
− β = iγ 1 + iτ A R(T(cid:48))|A(z,T − T(cid:48))|2dT(cid:48) . (1)
k shock
∂z k! ∂Tk ∂T
−∞
k≥2
Here A(z,T) represents the field envelope, and the β ’s and γ are the usual dispersion and
k
nonlinear coefficients, respectively. The nonlinear response function R(t) = (1 − f )δ(t) +
R
3

f h (t) includes both instantaneous electronic and delayed Raman contributions, with f =
R R R
0.18 representing the Raman contribution. For h (t) the experimentally measured fused silica
R
Raman cross-section is used [2]. The time derivative term on the right-hand side models
the dispersion of the nonlinearity and is associated with such effects as self-steepening and
optical shock formation, characterized by a time scale τ . In addition to spontaneous
shock
Raman noise, input shot noise is accounted for semiclassically through the addition of a
noise seed of one photon per mode with random phase in each spectral discretization bin.
We first illustrate the numerical results obtained based on the injection of 150 W peak
power and 5 ps duration gaussian pulses with different random noise seeds in a 25 m long
photonic crystal fiber with a zero-dispersion wavelength at 1030 nm. Fiber parameters are
those used in previous studies [9, 25]. Specifically, we generate an ensemble of 1000 SC
events for a pump wavelength at 1035 nm slightly in the anomalous dispersion regime so
that SC generation is seeded from noise-driven modulation instability. Figure 1(a) shows
the superposition of all the individual spectra from the simulated ensemble (gray traces)
and the calculated mean spectrum (solid line) at the fiber output. When we use long-pass
filter positioned on the long wavelength edge of the SC spectrum (1260 nm for the results
shown), we can extract a time series from the Fourier Transforms of the filtered spectral
components, and perform statistical analysis of the power of the filtered temporal peaks.
Figure 1(b) shows the intensity distribution histogram that results, and we can see that it
possesses an L-shape with a long tail characteristic of extreme-value events and similar to
the skewed statistical distributions of wave heights observed in oceanic rogue waves [26].
Fig. 1. (a) Output spectra of 1000 individual simulations (gray) and the calcu-
lated mean spectrum (black). (b) Histogram of the intensity distribution when
each simulation spectrum is filtered with a long-pass filter at 1260 nm. The
inset uses a log-log representation.
4

3. Statistics with Spectral Filtering
The use of a spectral filter will fully capture all the solitons that undergo significant Raman
SSFSs well-beyond its long pass wavelength such that the effect of the filter on the soliton
spectrum is negligible. On the other hand, for any given realisation in the ensemble, the
most red-shifted soliton in the output SC supercontinuum may not in general lie completely
beyond the filter transmission wavelength, and thus will be significantly clipped by the filter.
In this case, peak power of the corresponding Fourier-transformed peak in the filtered time
series will not accurately reflect the peak power of the original unfiltered red-shifted soliton.
We show this quantitatively in Fig. 2 where we have performed a detailed inspection of
the 1000 events in the ensemble to determine the exact peak power of the most red-shifted
soliton in each realisation without any spectral filtering. This was accomplished by using a
two-dimensional filtering procedure based on the calculated spectrogram of the field to isolate
the longest wavelength soliton cleanly and then to determine its peak power. This approach
also removes the influence of normal dispersion dispersive wave radiation components from
the corresponding temporal soliton profile allowing accurate determination of the peak power.
The results of this analysis are shown in Fig. 2 (a) where we plot the histogram of the most
red-shifted soliton without filtering. In this case, the distribution remains skewed but does
not possess the very strong L-shape as in Fig. 1 (b). Interestingly, however, the skewed form
of the distribution is still fitted by a Weibull distribution that is commonly used to fit extreme
value processes. On the other hand, other distributions such as the Rayleigh distribution can
also provide good fits to the statistics for this case. We have also performed an analysis of the
wavelength distribution of the most red-shifted solitons in the SC spectra and these results
are shown in Fig. 2(b). Here we plot the distribution of soliton frequency shifts (relative to
the pump) and we find that the distribution is in fact near-Gaussian, although there is a
very small residual skewness.
An important conclusion to draw from these results is that, with the parameter regime
we consider here, the SC statistics obtained with spectral filtering do not provide a correct
quantitative measure of the properties of the most redshifted soliton when examining an
ensemble of noisy SC spectra. Our results also show that it is not as a result of extreme value
statistics in the Raman SSFS that skewed distributions are measured in the corresponding
(filtered or unfiltered) soliton peak powers. On the other hand, spectral filtering is a very
convenient experimental technique and will certainly capture a certain number of discrete
high power soliton events. Also, in experiments where filtering is used to select a portion of
the spectra for particular applications (eg: spectroscopy) then the statistics measured after
filtering (whatever distribution they may take) are indeed those that are relevant. But for
more general considerations involving soliton dynamics, it is important to carefully consider
the effect of spectral filtering in clipping the spectral content of many of the solitons that
5

one wishes to characterise.
(a) (b) )W( rewop kaep etulosbA (c)
ycneuqerF dezilamroN ycneuqerF dezilamroN
0.06 0.06 2500
2000
0.04 0.04
1500
0.02 0.02
1000
0 0 500
500 1000 1500 40 50 60 0 500 1000 1500
Peak Power (W) Frequency shift (THz) Filtered peak power (W)
Fig. 2. (a) Statistical distribution of the intensity of the most redshifted soliton
at the fiber output in the absence of spectral filtering together fitted with a
Weibull distribution (in red). (b) Statistical distribution of the (absolute value
of) frequency-shift relative to the pump taken at the -20 dB bamdwidth of the
most redshifted soliton at the fiber output in the absence of spectral filtering
fitted with a Gaussian distribution (in red). (c) Plot of soliton peak power
without filtering (“Absolute Peak Power”) against the peak power measured
when filtering at cutoff wavelengths of 1260 nm.
4. Statistics with Full Field Analysis
Of course, when considering the dynamics in general terms, there is no a priori reason to
restrict the analysis only to the most red-shifted solitons in the generated SC spectra. It
is equally meaningful to consider the maximum peak power observed across a given output
temporal profile of the SC without any filtering or processing at all and indeed, this may
well be a more appropriate approach when considering analogies with the oceanic environ-
ment. So with this method, we analyse the temporal profile of the SC field including all
contributing frequency components in the spectrum (except for some low amplitude normal
dispersion regime components), and we search for the ”absolute maximum peak power” for
each realization in the ensemble. We refer to this as “Full Field Analysis”.
Firstly, it is interesting to compare how the absolute maximum peak power from the full
temporal intensity profile correlates with the peak power measured in the presence of a
spectral filter. These results are shown in Figs. 2(c) for a filter cutoff wavelength at 1260 nm
corresponding to a filter close to the long wavelength edge. We see that although there
is a loose correlation above filtered peak powers of 500 W, there is a very high degree of
scatter and indeed, the full temporal profile contains some events with absolute peak power
exceeding 2 kW which are not captured at all by the spectral filtering. In fact, these events
also do not appear in the histogram in Fig. 2(a) calculated using the spectrogram approach
6

to isolate the extreme red-shifted solitons, suggesting that they have a different physical
origin that we now discuss in detail.
In order to obtain quantitative information on the relative amplitudes of all the high-
amplitude peaks present on the temporal profile we employ a numerical peak-detection al-
gorithm. We consider only high power pulses in the anomalous dispersion regime where
strongly localised pulses and solitons are expected, so our approach includes filtering out
spectral content in the normal dispersion regime. We subsequently detect the local maxima
in the temporal domain and then detect the neighboring zeros of the maximum (or values
close to zero - we used a threshold of < 5%), which allows to isolate individual high power
pulses. In fact, analysis of the pulse characteristics (eg: soliton number) isolated with this
technique confirms that they are indeed solitons. Note that this method can be envisaged
as an adaptation of the zero-crossing technique commonly used in hydrodynamics to isolate
individual wave events. We neglected all waves/pulses with a peak power lower than 100
W as these typically correspond to non-solitonic radiation and residual pump components
typically consisting of weakly modulated wave train and not a localised pulse. Although
the choice of this threshold may seem arbitrary it is not possible to determine an absolute
threshold value that would allow to reject all -and only- non-solitonic radiation content.
Nonetheless, we checked that with this choice of threshold only very few solitons with low
peak power were omitted and therefore the statistics of the nearly 10000 captured solitons
are not significantly affected.
Figure 3(a) illustrates the statistical distribution of all the soliton amplitudes obtained
from nearly 10000 individual events at the fiber output. This corresponds to an average of
10 solitons per shot emerging from the breakup of the input pulse. The distribution is seen
to exhibit a rather complex shape with two distinct maxima and a long tail indicating that
very few solitons exhibit a significantly larger amplitude than the mean.
To progress further, we now introduce a hydrodynamic definition of the events that consti-
tute “rogue behaviour”. Specifically, we define an optical rogue event here as a soliton whose
height (peak power) is more than twice the significant wave height (i.e. the mean peak power
of the one-third largest amplitude solitons). Remarkably, with this choice of definition and
as emphasized in Fig. 3(b), only three waves located at the extreme end of the distribution
tail satisfy this criterion for consideration as an optical rogue wave. Even perhaps more sur-
prisingly: (i) the shots to which these waves correspond lie in the zero-intensity bin in Fig.
1(b) when long-wavelength spectral filtering is used and (ii) none of these correspond to the
most redshifted soliton of the associated shot and are thus absent in Fig. 2(a). Significantly,
this means that considerations of optical rogue waves in terms of events that survive after
spectral filtering or that correspond to extreme redshifting trajectories actually exclude these
particular large amplitude events that correspond closely to a hydrodynamic definition.
7

Fig. 3. (a) Statistical distribution of all soliton amplitudes at the fiber output.
The inset plots the results on a log-log scale. (b) Zoom on the tail emphasizing
the events that qualify as “rogue” using hydrodynamic definitions (red).
To see why these highest amplitude events are missed by these two approaches to detection,
we compare the time-frequency spectrograms of two particular events in Fig. 4. Specifically,
Fig. 4(a) plots an event where a single soliton experiences significant red-shift beyond the
cutoff-wavelength of the long-pass filter (the dashed line in the figure). Its detection therefore
yields a peak power of around 1.3 kW. On the other hand, Fig. 4(b) shows that the realisation
with the maximum absolute peak power (exceeding 2 kW in the time trace projected below
the spectrogram) arises physically from the nonlinear superposition or collision between two
solitons with different wavelengths. Significantly, because this case does not yield significant
spectral content beyond the cutoff wavelength, spectral filtering would only detect it as a low
power event. In addition, even consideration of the single most red-shifted soliton peak power
from the spectrum would also not accurately represent the physical nature of this particular
event. It is necessary to consider such collision-events as distinct from single soliton events
in order to understand their contribution to the rogue wave population. In this regard, we
stress that we have checked that similar collision scenarios occur for the two other events in
Fig. 3 that satisfy our hydrodynamic-based definition of optical rogue waves.
5. Discussion: the Subtle role of Collisions
As mentioned above, restricting the analysis of temporal content in the SC field to red-
shifted solitons or to the filtered long wavelength spectral edge can actually miss the highest
amplitude collision-induced peaks on the output temporal profile. And significantly, it is
8

(a)
(b)
Fig. 4. (a)Spectrogram representation of the output field for the event asso-
ciated with the maximum peak power for filtered statistics and (b) overall
maximum peak power of the full field. The spectrograms were calculated from
the output fields assuming a 200 fs gate function. Red vertical line indicates
the cutoff wavelength of the long-pass filter (1260 nm).
9

these peaks which actually satisfy an equivalent hydrodynamic definition as a “rogue” event.
The relationship between collisions and optical rogue waves, however, is rather subtle,
because collisions are also very important in understanding the class of extreme red-shifted
rogue solitons captured with spectral filtering at the SC long wavelength edge. To discss
this in detail, Fig. 5 shows the dynamical evolution of the pulse envelope in both spectral
and temporal domains for a typical event in the tail of the intensity distribution shown in
Fig. 1(b). In this case, it can be seen how after 14 m of propagation a localized structure is
suddenly ejected from the long wavelength edge of the SC spectrum. In the time domain this
corresponds to a collision between solitons following different trajectories because of their
different group velocities.
The effect of the collision at 14 m is two-fold (i) it transfers energy to the soliton with lower
frequency, which in turn induces a subsequent change in its velocity (i.e. increases the rate of
Raman shifting) and (ii) it induces a cross-frequency shift onto the largest amplitude soliton
towards shorter frequencies [27]. More specifically, during the collision, the low frequency
soliton overlaps with the Raman gain induced by the high frequency soliton leading to
significant exchange of energy. As a result, the peak power of the low frequency soliton is
increased significantly leading to a corresponding enhancement in the Raman self-frequency
shift after the collision point. In addition, if the frequency difference between the colliding
solitons is less than 13.2 THz so that the low frequency soliton coincides with the positive
slope of the Raman gain induced by the high frequency soliton, the energy exchange leads
to a net shift of the low frequency soltion during the collision process.
This mechanism is knows as soliton cross-frequency shift which, in contrast to the self-
frequency shift, is a localized effect occurring only over the distance the colliding solitons
temporally overlap [28]. The relative magnitude of the cross-frequency shift depends on
several factors such as the amplitudes of the colliding solitons and their frequency separation.
In general, the larger (smaller) the amplitudes (frequency separation) of the colliding solitons,
the larger the cross frequency shift [29,30]. As a result of the cross-frequency shift and energy
exchange during the collision the rate of subsequent self-frequency shift for the low frequency
soliton is effectively enhanced compared to the case where no collision would occur. Therefore,
it is primarily the collision process that leads eventually to an extension of the SC bandwidth
at the fiber output.
It can now be appreciated that whether or not a soliton is fully captured by a spectral
filter at the fiber output is mostly determined by the occurrence of a collision that induces
a large cross-frequency shift and significant energy exchange. This is in fact confirmed when
carefully inspecting all the events corresponding to the tail of the distribution shown in Fig.
1(b) and whose evolution is found to follow similar dynamics. Furthermore, solitons that are
fully captured by the spectral filtering have experienced a significant frequency-shift and, due
10

(a) (b)
Fig. 5. Density plots of (a) spectral and (b) temporal evolution for a traditional
optical rogue wave. Point of collision and the following transient behaviour in
the spectral evolution is emphasized with white curves.
to the positive third-order dispersion coefficient, their amplitude has significantly dropped
after the collision. On the other hand the solitons that are partly or not captured by the
spectral filter have experienced a reduced red-shift and their amplitude may be larger than
that of the fully-captured solitons. The important conclusion here is that the histogram of
the filtered intensities as shown in Fig. 1(b) should not be interpreted as describing the actual
power distribution of the most red-shifted solitons but rather the distribution of SC spectra
exceeding the filter cutoff wavelength via soliton collision-induced mechanisms as described
above. In this regard, note that although collision-related dynamics lead to extended SC
spectrum, the positive third-order dispersion tends to reduce the rate of red-shift so that the
statistical distribution of SC spectra is in fact nearly Gaussian (see Fig. 2(b)).
We now consider the properties of high power events analysed along the propagation
distance. In particular, because collisions are localized events, it is very likely that the most
powerful events occuring in each shot - and along the full propagation distance - differs from
that captured at a given distance. This is precisely what is seen in Fig. 6 which plots the
distance at which the maximum amplitude reached in each realization occurs. Although no
obvious systematic correlation can be extracted from the figure, of significant importance is
the fact that the most powerful events mostly occurs after a distance of 10-14 m whereas it
is only in rare cases that the highest peak power events generally occur at the fiber output;
recall that the case above recorded only 3 collisions out of 10000 at the output.
But even in the cases where the collisions occur at the output, the maximum amplitude
is still substantially reduced compared to cases where the most powerful event occurs at an
11

26
24
22
20
)m( ecnatsiD
18
16
14
12
10
8
2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
Peak power (W)
Fig. 6. Propagation distance at which the maximum intensity attained during
each shot is reached.
early stage. Both these observations can in fact be explained by considering the dynamics
leading to the development of the SC. After the initial phase of MI and soliton emergence,
the solitons subsequently begin to experience collisons due to different group velocities (re-
sulting from the higher-order dispersion and Raman scattering perturbations.) It is precisely
at this stage where the solitons start colliding that corresponds to the 10-14 m distance
range (of course this depends on the particular parameters chosen). And since the solitons
have not propagated over a sufficient distance so as to be well-separated from each other in
time it is therefore not surprising that the probability of observing large amplitude events is
substantially larger than after a longer propagation distance. Indeed, after longer distances
solitons are well separated in time and posses a lower amplitude due to the effect of posi-
tive third-order dispersion, which significantly decreases the probability of observing large
amplitude collisions. This explains why only in rare cases the most powerful events in each
shot are in fact not captured for distances where the SC has fully developed.
6. Conclusions
In this paper, we have considered several different aspects of how the statistics of high in-
tensity and/or long wavelength “events” in SC generation should be analysed for the regime
of high soliton number noise-driven picosecond excitation. Firstly, the use of a spectral filter
will fully capture all the solitons at frequencies beyond its long pass wavelength but will clip
(or not measure at all) solitons at wavelengths below the filter transmission wavelength. In
this case, the power of peaks in the filtered time series will not accurately reflect the peak
12

power of the original unfiltered red-shifted solitons generated in the SC. Moreover, spectral
clipping in the vicinity of the filter transmission wavelength can lead to some soliton pulses
being attenuated to the point when they contribute significantly to the portion of the L-
shaped distribution containing low power events. The events in the tails still do correspond
to distinct soliton pulses that have undergone larger than average frequency shifts due to
collision-related mechanisms (eg: the Raman cross-frequency shift), but the association of
soliton dynamics with an extreme L-shaped distribution must be considered with care be-
cause the vertical low power branch of the ”L” can actually contain a significant population
of clipped soliton events.
A potentially clearer association between SC fluctuations and hydrodynamic rogue wave
statistics appears when once considers a full field analysis. This reveals the presence of a very
small number of collision-induced events occurring at the output of the fiber. These do not
correspond to extreme red-shifting trajectories, but nevertheless yield a higher peak power
than the single soliton events that do shift to longer wavelengths. They also occur more rarely
and can be related more rigorously with the hydrodynamic rogue waves through an adapted
hydrodynamic definition. We have also considered in detail the physics of collision processes
in determining the propagation dynamics that yield both “filtered” and “full field” classes
of optical rogue wave event. Finally, we remark that the dynamics of SC generation are very
complex, and the conclusions drawn here must be considered within the framework of the
high soliton number excitation condition, the broadband noise source used and the near-
zero dispersion wavelength pumping. Although we have fully confirmed that our conclusions
apply to high soliton number excitation of picosecond pulses and to high power continuous
wave pumping, other initial conditions may yield different statistics and more case-by-case
studies will be necessary to establish a more complete picture of the statistical properties of
optical rogue waves. As in the oceanic case, understanding the statistics seems to be a central
and necessary area of study in order to develop the most general interpretation possible.
Acknowledgments
We thank the Academy of Finland (research grants 130099 and 132279), the Institut Univer-
sitaire de France, and the French Agence Nationale de la Recherche project MANUREVA
(ANR-08-SYSC-019) for support. M. Erkintalo acknowledges support from the graduate
school of Tampere University of Technology.
References
1. A.W. Scott, The Nonlinear Universe (Springer, Berlin, 2007)
2. J.M. Dudley, G. Genty, S. Coen, Rev. Mod. Phys. 78, 1135 (2006)
13

3. M.N. Islam, G. Sucha, I. Bar-Joseph, M. Wegener, J.P. Gordon, D.S. Chemla, Opt. Lett.
14(7), 370 (1989)
4. M.N. Islam, G. Sucha, I. Bar-Joseph, M. Wegener, J.P. Gordon, D.S. Chemla, J. Opt.
Soc. Am. B 6(6), 1149 (1989)
5. M. Nakazawa, K.R. Tamura, H. Kubota, E. Yoshida, Opt. Fib. Tech. 4(2), 215 (1998)
6. M. Nakazawa, H. Kubota, K.R. Tamura, Opt. Lett. 24(5), 318 (1999)
7. K.L. Corwin, N.R. Newbury, J.M. Dudley, S. Coen, S.A. Diddams, K. Weber, R.S.
Windeler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 113904 (2003)
8. D.R. Solli, C. Ropers, P. Koonath, B. Jalali, Nature 450, 1054 (2007)
9. J.M. Dudley, G. Genty, B.J. Eggleton, Opt. Express 16, 3644 (2008)
10. G. Genty, J.M. Dudley, B.J. Eggleton, Appl. Phys. B 94, 187 (2009), original publication:
arXiv:0809.2388v1, 14 Sept. 2008
11. M. Erkintalo, G. Genty, J.M. Dudley, Opt. Lett. 34, 2468 (2009), ISSN 0146-9592
12. A. Mussot, A. Kudlinski, M. Kolobov, E. Louvergneaux, M. Douay, M. Taki, Opt. Ex-
press 17, 17010 (2009)
13. B. Barviau, B. Kibler, S. Coen, A. Picozzi, Opt. Lett. 33, 2833 (2008)
14. M. Taki, A. Mussot, A. Kudlinski, E. Louvergneaux, M. Kolobov, M. Douay, Phys. Lett.
A 374, 691 (2010)
15. G. Genty, C. de Sterke, O. Bang, F. Dias, N. Akhmediev, J. M. Dudley, Phys. Lett. A
374, 989-996 (2010)
16. N. Akhmediev, V.I. Korneev, Theor. Math. Phys. 69, 1089 (1986)
17. J.M. Dudley, G. Genty, F. Dias, B. Kibler, N. Akhmediev, Opt. Express 17, 21497 (2009)
18. N. Akhmediev, A. Ankiewicz, M. Taki, Phys. Lett. A 373, 675 (2009)
19. N. Akhmediev, J.M. Soto-Crespo, A. Ankiewicz, Phys. Lett. A 373, 2137 (2009)
20. M. Onorato, A.R. Osborne, M. Serio, Phys. Rev. Lett. 96, 014503 (2006)
21. P.K. Shukla, I. Kourakis, B. Eliasson, M. Marklund, L. Stenflo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 97
094501 (2006)
22. M.H. Frosz, O. Bang, A. Bjarklev, Opt. Express 14(20), 9391 (2006)
23. F. Luan, D.V. Skryabin, A.V. Yulin, J.C. Knight, Opt. Express 14(21), 9844 (2006)
24. M. Erkintalo, G. Genty, J.M. Dudley, Opt. Lett. 35(5), 658 (2010)
25. C. Lafargue, J. Bolger, G. Genty, F. Dias, J.M. Dudley, B.J. Eggleton, Electron. Lett.
45, 217 (2009)
26. E. Pelinovsky, C. Kharif, eds., Extreme Ocean Waves (Springer, Berlin, 2008)
27. S. Kumar, A. Selvarajan, G.V. Anand, Opt. Commun. 102, 329 (1993)
28. G.P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics, 4th edn. (Academic Press, San Diego, 2006)
29. B.A. Malomed, Phys. Rev. A 44, 1412 (1991)
14

30. T.I. Lakoba, D.J. Kaup, Opt. Lett. 24, 808 (1999)
15