Draft version October 18, 2018
Preprint typeset using LATEX style emulateapj v. 5/2/11
TAILS FROM THE ORPHANAGE
Carl J. Grillmair
IPAC, Mail Code 314-6, Caltech, 1200 E. California Blvd., Pasadena, CA 91125
Draft version October 18, 2018
ABSTRACT
Examining a portion of the northern Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) footprint, we detect at least
6102 ceD 9  ]AG.hp-ortsa[  1v18130.2161:viXra
three and possibly seven halo debris streams. One of these (PS1-D) was recently detected in the Pan-
STARRS1 3π survey, and the remaining two are also evident as extensions of the SDSS detections.
All of these streams are metal poor and are found at a distance of around 21±5 kpc. The streams are
◦ ◦
between 65 and 70 in length, oriented almost north-south, and are nearly parallel and somewhat
convergent with the neighboring Orphan stream. Surface densities ranging from 1.5 to 0.5 stars per
square degree down to g = 21.7 correspond to surface brightnesses between 35 and 37 mag per square
arcsecond. The streams each appear to be more than 300 pc across, suggesting either dwarf/ultrafaint
galaxy progenitors or long-term heating of very ancient globular cluster streams. The orbits of all
but one of these streams appear to be nearly radial, and the orbit normals suggest that all of the
streams are part of the Vast Polar Structure, a relatively narrow plane that contains most of the
known satellite galaxies, globular clusters, and stellar streams.
Subject headings: Galaxy: Structure — Galaxy: Halo
1. INTRODUCTION (2011).
Figure 1 shows the result of applying a matched filter
Dozens of distinct, highly collimated stellar debris
in the color-magnitude domain to the western half of the
streams are now known to orbit in the halo of our Galaxy
northern footprint of the SDSS. The filter is based on the
(see Grillmair & Carlin (2016) and Smith (2016) for re-
color-magnitude distribution of stars in the old, metal-
views). Detecting and tracing such streams around the
poor globular cluster NGC 5053 with [Fe/H] ≈ −2.29
Galaxy will become increasingly important as we refine
(Harris 1996). Three streams become apparent, running
our techniques for using them as probes of the Galactic
roughly north-south and somewhat convergent with the
potential (Ku¨pper et al. 2015; Bovy et al. 2016) and of
Orphan stream, similar in appearance to the claw marks
the distribution of dark matter subhalos (Carlberg 2009;
that bears commonly leave on trees.
Yoon et al. 2011). Knowing in advance the locations and
Figure 2 shows the distribution of E(B − V )
trajectories of these streams may also help us interpret
over the same region of sky as in Figure 1
the vast amount of data we expect to harvest from up-
(Schlegel, Finkbeiner, & Davis 1998) . While there are
coming Gaia data releases.
evidently some random clumps of dust emission between
While searching for and examining other streams in the
the streams, there are no linear features that resemble
Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS), we have long noted a
the streams in Figure 1. We conclude that the features
somewhat fibrous texture in the area of sky surround-
in Figure 1 are not an artifact of reddening-induced in-
ing the Orphan stream (the “orphanage”). However, de-
◦ completeness.
tailed examinations at high spatial resolution (0.1 ) have
Figure 3 shows the same part of the sky in a
not revealed any obvious streams at a signal-to-noise ra-
matched-filtered map of the Pan-STARRS 3π survey
tio sufficient for publication. In this Letter we coarsen
(Bernard et al. 2016) for a distance of 25 kpc. While
our spatial sampling considerably, enabling the detection
there are evidently issues with spatially variable com-
of at least three nearly parallel, low-metallicity stellar de-
pleteness at the limit of the single-epoch survey, each of
bris streams. We describe our detection method in Sec-
the streams in Figure 1 has a counterpart in Figure 3 ex-
tion 2. We make an initial attempt to constrain the or-
tending to the southern limit of the Pan-STARRS survey.
bits in Section 3, and discuss additional low-significance
That the streams are not as obvious as they are in Figure
structures in Section 4. Concluding remarks are given in
1 is presumably at least partly due to the more metal-rich
Section 5.
([Fe/H] = -1.5) isochrone used by Bernard et al. (2016).
2. ANALYSIS For example, the Orphan stream appears considerably
weaker in Figure 3 than it does in Grillmair (2006a),
We make use of the photometric catalog from data
Belokurov et al. (2006), or Newberg et al. (2010).
release 10 of the SDSS. Experience has shown that we
The features in Figures 1 and 3 extend through the
probe most deeply and are most sensitive to differences
constellations Leo, Leo Minor, Hydra, Sextans, Antlia,
in stellar populations using just the g,r, and i measure-
and Pyxis. Since there are also multiple streams in the
ments. We use all objects classed as stars and with g <
same constellations, we follow Grillmair (2014) and name
21.7. Photometry is dereddened using the DIRBE/IRAS
the streams after rivers cited in the Illiad. Henceforth we
dust maps of Schlegel, Finkbeiner, & Davis (1998), cor-
refer to the stream next to PS1-D as Sangarius, and the
rected using the prescription of Schlafly & Finkbeiner
stream next to Orphan as Scamander.
carl@ipac.caltech.edu The trajectories of the streams north of the bright,

2
southern Sagittarius arm in panel d of Figure 1 are obvi- Once again, given the complexity of the field, it is diffi-
ously somewhat conjectural. While they appear plausi- cult to measure the surface density of field stars. Our
ble, the discontinuity created by the Sagittarius stream best estimate yields mean stream surface densities of
◦
creates some ambiguity, and velocity information will 0.5 stars per square degree for the southernmost 15
(−35◦ −20◦
be required before we can definitively conclude that the < η < ) of PS1-D and Sangarius in Figure
northern extensions are not unrelated structures. Includ- 1 and 1.5 stars per square degree for the same portion
ing both northern (Figure 1) and southern portions (Fig- of Scamander. This is superposed on a field star sur-
◦ ◦
ure 3) of the streams, the arc lengths are 68 , 59 , and face density, selected using the same photometric con-
◦
66 for PS1-D, Sangarius, and Scamander, respectively. straints, of about 10 stars per square degree. We are
At a distance of 21 kpc, this translates to physical lengths therefore sampling the streams with a total of between
of 25, 22, and 24 kpc, respectively. 30 and 110 stars down to g = 21.7. If we adopt a glob-
In equatorial coordinates, the trajectory of PS1-D can ular cluster-like luminosity function and integrate down
◦
be modeled to σ = 0.19 using: the main sequence, then for a distance of 21 kpc, we find
that there should be between 440 (Sangarius) and 1600
(Scamander) stars in total within these portions of the
α = 141.017+ 0.208δ − 0.02491δ2 + 0.000609δ3
streams. A similar integration yields equivalent surface
10−6δ4
−1.20989× (1) brightnesses of between 35 and 37 magnitudes per square
arcsecond. If the stream segments we see are portions of
◦
Sangarius is well modeled (σ = 0.22 ) with:
streams that encircle the Galaxy, then we arrive at total
populations of the progenitors of between 104 and 4×104
α = 148.9492− 0.03811δ + 0.001505δ2 (2)
stars, e.g. comparable to the populations of modern-day
globular clusters.
while Scamander again requires a higher-order fit (σ =
◦ There are no known globular clusters or dwarf galaxies
0.11 ):
falling near great circles defined by each stream. though
this is not conclusive as the uncertainties are high. On
α = 155.642− 0.1000δ − 0.00191δ2 − 0.0003346δ3 the other hand, the widths of the streams, combined with
10−5δ4 their tenuousness, may be an indication of great age and
+1.47775× (3)
of the possibility that the progenitors dissolved long ago.
Grillmair (2009) quantified the significance of streams
3.
ORBITS
above the background using the “T” statistic, measuring
the median filtered surface density in multiple segments Though we have as yet no velocity information
as one sweeps across the sky perpendicular to the orien- for these streams, and while we are mindful of the
tation of the stream. The region of sky in the vicinity fact that streams do not precisely follow single orbits
of the orphanage is quite complex, with the Sagittar- (Eyre & Binney 2011), the distances and trajectories of
ius, Orphan, EBS, and AntiCenter streams, along with the streams can give us some idea of the orbit param-
the orphanage streams themselves, making it difficult to eters. We use a model for the Galactic potential by
measure the noise floor in a stream-free region. In Figure Allen & Santillan (1991) and fit in a least-squares sense
4 we show the run of T across an unsmoothed version to five or six, roughly equidistant normal points along
−35◦ 0◦
of Figure 1, normalizing to the “field” RMS measured each stream in the region < η < . We assign a
in an identical manner in an apparently blank region of distance of 21 kpc to the middle and the ends of each
sky to the north and east of the Sagittarius stream. We stream. While our distance estimates are far less certain
use equations 1, 2, and 3 to define the stream segments than the stream trajectories on the sky, we find that the
we pass over each respective stream. We detect PS1-D ends of the streams disappear if we shift the selection fil-
and Scamander at roughly the 5σ level, while we detect ter by more than ≈ 0.5 mag faintward or brightward; the
Sangarius at somewhere between 2 and 4σ. These levels streams are evidently nearly perpendicular to our line of
◦
roughly accord with the visual impression in Figure 1. sight. We assign 0.3 uncertainties to the positions of
◦
Sampling a version of Figure 1 using 0.1 binning, we the individual normal points and 5 kpc uncertainties to
◦
find that the FWHMs of the streams range from 0.9 to our distance estimates.
◦
1.1 . At a distance of 21 kpc, this corresponds to physical Table 1 lists the orbit parameters corresponding to the
widths ranging from 330 to 400 pc, broader than most best fits. The uncertainties are estimated by setting each
of the known globular cluster streams but narrower than of the three free parameters (the radial velocity and the
the Orphan stream. This suggests that the streams could two components of proper motion) to their 90% limits
be either the remnants of diminutive dwarf or ultrafaint and refitting the stream using the remaining two param-
galaxies, or (more likely given our population estimates eters. While the orbital planes are quite well constrained
below) globular cluster streams that have been heated by the observed trajectories of the streams, the radial
for 10 Gyr or more by dark-matter subhalos (Carlberg velocities and hence eccentricities are evidently nearly
2009). unconstrained.
Color-magnitude diagrams for the streams are shown The convex-eastwards curvature found by
in Figure 5. All of the streams appear to be quite metal Bernard et al. (2016) for PS1-D is at odds with
poor ([Fe/H] ≤ −1.4), which is expected since our filter any plausible orbit around the Galaxy. This westward-
was designed to capture metal-poor substructures. To bending feature at the north end of the stream is visible
estimate the number of stars in each stream, we count in panels (b) and (c) of Figure 1, though in the SDSS
only stars that lie within 2σ of the NGC 5053 color- data it is neither an obvious continuation of the stream
magnitude locus and on the subgiant branch or below. nor clearly preferred over the eastward-bending feature

3
we trace in panel (d). The stream trace in panel (d) three, and possibly seven stellar debris streams. With
alleviates the nonphysical aspect of the orbit, though 30 to 110 stars per stream and equivalent surface bright-
arcsec−2,
only just. This suggests that the northern part of the nesses > 35 mag these streams are likely at the
Bernard et al. (2016) stream may actually be some very limit of what can be detected in the SDSS. Yet they
unrelated structure. Deeper photometric data and/or are enticing as perhaps the tip a substantial iceberg, as
Gaia proper motions will be required to determine the well as an indicator of what we may discover when Gaia
true path of PS1-D north of the Sagittarius stream. proper motions become available.
Both our eastward-bending PS1-D and Sangarius ap- All of these streams appear to orbit within the VPOS,
pear to be on nearly radial orbits, while Scamander is on believed to contain the majority of surviving satellite
a less extreme, somewhat more tightly bound orbit. We galaxies. Once this has beenverified with velocity infor-
note that the Orphan stream is also on a far-flung orbit, mation, these streams will clearly add to the significance
with R ≃ 90 kpc (Newberg et al. 2010). This suggests of this structure and to the consequences it may have for
apo
the possibility that PS1-D and Sangarius may be dynam- our understanding of galaxy formation in ΛCDM.
ically related to Orphan in some way, perhaps through a
much larger structure that gave rise to Orphan. Table 1
We are grateful to Edouard Bernard for making avail-
shows that the orbital poles for PS1-D, Sangarius, and
able matched-filtered maps of the Pan-STARRS 3π sur-
Scamander all lie between those of the Orphan and An-
vey. We are also grateful to an anonymous referee for
ticenter streams. This consequently puts them within
several thoughtful suggestions that improved both the
the region defining the Vast Polar Structure (VPOS)
content and readability of the paper.
(Pawlowski et al. 2012) that apparently contains the or-
Facilities: Sloan, PS1
bits of most of the known dwarf galaxies, globular clus-
ters, and stellar debris streams orbiting our Galaxy.
REFERENCES
4.
STILL OTHER STREAMS?
Careful examination of Figure 1 shows that there may
Allen, C., & Santillan, A. 1991, Rev. Mex. Astron. Astrofis., 22,
be at least four more streams, at S/Ns considerably lower 255
than those of the streams analyzed above, at a distance Belokurov, V., Zucker, D. B., Evans, N. W., et al. 2006, ApJ, 642,
of ≈ 21 kpc in the region 0◦ > λ > −25◦ ,−5◦ < η < 25◦ . L137
Belokurov, V., Evans, N. W., Irwin, M. J., et al. 2007, ApJ, 658,
These ladder-like structures are almost certainly affected
337
by discontinuities in the SDSS scan direction, but the
Bernard, E. J., Ferguson, A. M. N., Schlafly, E. F., et al. 2016,
enhancements in the north-south direction are less easy MNRAS, 463, 1759
to dismiss. Bovy, J., Bahmanyar, A., Fritz, T. K., & Kallivayalil, N. 2016,
arXiv:1609.01298
If indeed these are additional streams, then their sim-
Carlberg, R. G., ApJ, 705, 223
ilar orientations suggest that either the data or our fil-
Eyre, A., & Binney, J. 2011, MNRAS, 413, 1852
tering and analysis are somehow particularly sensitive
Grillmair, C. J., 2006a, ApJ, 645, L37
to streams oriented in a nearly north-south direction, Grillmair, C. J., 2006b, ApJ, 651, L29
or that the VPOS once contained many more objects Grillmair, C. J. 2009, ApJ, 693, 1118
Grillmair, C. J. 2011, ApJ, 738, 98
(clusters or dwarf galaxies) than we see today. Concern-
Grillmair, C. J. 2014, ApJ, 790, 10
ing the former, we are certainly biased against selecting
Grillmair, C. J., Hetherington, L., Carlberg, R. G., & Willman,
structures oriented along the SDSS east-west scan direc-
B. 2015, ApJ, 812, L26
tion, but we know of no process or peculiarity that could Grillmair, C. J., & Carlin, J. L. 2016, in Tidal Streams in the
enhance apparently linear structures in the cross-scan di- Local Group and Beyond, H. J. Newberg & J. L. Carlin eds.,
Springer
rection. These potential streams will need to be verified
Hargis, J. R., Kimmig, B., Willman, B., et al. 2016, ApJ, 820
once we have access to other surveys (e.g. Pan-STARRS)
Harris, W. E. 1996, AJ, 112, 1487
and other stream detection methods (e.g. Gaia). We
Ku¨pper, A. H. W., Balbinot, E., Bonaca, A., et al. 2015, ApJ,
mention them here primarily to aid in the identification 803, 80
or verification of structures that may be discovered in Li, J., Newberg, H. J, Carlin, J. L, 2012, ApJ, 757, 151
Newberg, H. J., Willett, B. A., Yanny, B., & Xu, Y. 2010, ApJ,
upcoming Gaia releases.
711, 32
These features appear to have trajectories qualitatively
Pawlowski, M. S., Pflamm-Altenburg, J., & Kroupa, P. 2012,
similar to those of the three streams examined above.
MNRAS, 423, 1109
Orbit fits yield nearly radial orbits, with orbit normals Schlafly, E. F., & Finkbeiner, D. P. 2011, ApJ, 737, 103
(l,b = 199◦ ±1◦ ,26◦ ±4◦ ) that once again lie within the Schlegel, D. J., Finkbeiner, D. P., & Davis, M. 1998, ApJ, 500,
525
patch of sky associated with the VPOS.
Sesar, B., Grillmair, C. J., Cohen, J. G. et al. 2013, ApJ, 776, 26
Smith, M. C. 2016, in Tidal Streams in the Local Group and
5.
CONCLUSIONS
Beyond, H. J. Newberg & J. L. Carlin eds., Springer
Examining a region of the northern footprint of the Yoon, J. H., Johnston, K. V., & Hogg, D. W. 2011, ApJ, 731, 58
Sloan Digital Sky Survey, we find evidence for at least

4
70◦ ×85◦
Figure 1. Panel (a): filtered surface density map of the western portion of the northern SDSS footprint, in SDSS coordinates.
The SDSS coordinate system has the advantage that small differences in calibration and completeness from scan to scan are aligned east-
west, or very nearly along horizontal lines in the Figure. The matched filter is based on the color-magnitude distribution of stars in NGC
0.5◦ ×0.5◦ 1.5◦
5053, shifted to a distance of 21 kpc. The map has been binned to pixels, and smoothed with a Gaussian kernel of . The
stretch is linear, with lighter areas indicating higher surface densities. Panel (b): the same filtered image as in panel (a) after subtraction
◦
of a smoothed background image constructed using an annular median window filter of radius 4.5 . Panel (c): The map in panel (a) after
◦
subtracting a version of itself that is shifted 1 to the east. Panel (d): same as panel (a), but with the streams indicated. The curves
◦
correspond to Equations 1, 2, and 3, shifted east and west by 2.5 . The blue curve shows the Orphan stream trajectory of Newberg et al.
(2010). The light blue box indicates the location of four possible streams (labeled a, b, c, and d) discussed in Section 4.

5
Figure 2. The distribution of E(B − V), taken from Schlegel, Finkbeiner, & Davis (1998), in the same coordinate system as Figure 1.
The stretch is linear, with white indicating E(B −V) > 0.09 and black corresponding to E(B −V) < 0.01

6
Figure 3. A portion of Bernard et al.’s (2016) matched-filtered density map of stars in a single epoch of the Pan-STARRS 3π survey. In
this case, the stars have been filtered using an isochrone with an age of 12 Gyr, a metallicity of [Fe/H] = -1.5, and a distance of 25 kpc.
The blue boxes indicate the region shown in Figure 1, and the red, green, and white curves are the same as those in panel d of Figure 1.
The stretch is linear, with lighter areas indicating higher surface densities. Despite the significant pattern noise due to variations in depth
and completeness, Sangarius, Scamander, and PS1-D all show indications of continuing southward, as indicated by the arrows.
Table 1
Predicted Motions and Orbit Parameters
PS1-D Sangarius Scamander
◦
Fiducial Point R.A. ( , J2000) 141.457 149.013 153.520
◦
dec ( , J2000) +11.301 +7.847 +12.460
v (km s−1 ) 63 ±109 156+314 151+38
hel −421 −46
Prograde Orbit µ cos(δ) (mas yr−1 ) −0.31±0.06 −0.78±0.19 −0.47±0.02
α
µ (mas yr−1) +3.16±0.9 +6.21+2.0 −1.01±0.07
δ −1.0
v (km s−1) 159±109 84+421 53+46
hel −314 −38
Retrograde Orbit µ cos(δ) (mas yr−1) +0.14±0.06 +0.21±0.19 −0.25±0.02
α
µ (mas yr−1 ) −7.0±0.9 −9.89+2.0 −2.55±0.07
δ −1.0
R (kpc) > 100 > 100 29±2
apo
R (kpc) 27±0.3 25±0.2 6±1
peri
i (◦ ) 64±3 79±5 34±1
ǫ > 0.6±0.3 > 0.6±0.3 0.66±0.03
Orbit Pole l (◦ ) 183 ±2 178±5 196 ±2
b (◦ ) −57±1 −52±1 −41±2

7
15 Orphan
Stream
Anticenter
10
Stream
Scamander
PS1−D
T
5
EBS
Sangarius
0
−70 −60 −50 −40 −30 −20 −10
λ
◦
Figure 4. The “T” statistic of Grillmair (2009) for the southern 15 of the streams in Figure 1. T is the median value, measured from
◦
the image filtered for a distance of 21 kpc, for five, 3 long segments in each stream. We have normalized the run of T by dividing by the
RMS measured the same way in an apparently blank region of sky north of the Sagittarius streams. The plotted values thus correspond
roughly to the S/N at each point. The peaks corresponding to the Anticenter Stream (Grillmair 2006b; Li et al. 2012), EBS (Grillmair 2011;
Hargis et al. 2016), and Orphan streams (Grillmair 2006a; Belokurov et al. 2007; Newberg et al. 2010; Sesar et al. 2013; Grillmair 2015)
show up only incidentally and are significantly lower than the S/Ns we would measure using more appropriate filters, correct distances,
and suitably oriented stream segments.
Figure 5. Dereddened (g −i)0 Hess diagrams for (a) PS1-D, (b) Sangarius, and (c) Scamander. The curves show the theoretical loci for
Z = 0.0001 ([Fe/H] = -2.2) in blue and Z = 0.0007 ([Fe/H] = -1.44) in red.