A tale of two sentiment scales: Disentangling
short-run and long-run components in
multivariate sentiment dynamics
0202 peS 7  ]NG.nif-q[  4v70410.0191:viXra
Danilo Vassallo Giacomo Bormetti Fabrizio Lillo
∗ † ‡
Abstract
We propose a novel approach to sentiment data filtering for a portfolio of assets. In
our framework, a dynamic factor model drives the evolution of the observed sentiment
and allows to identify two distinct components: a long-term component, modeled as a
random walk, and a short-term component driven by a stationary VAR(1) process. Our
model encompasses alternative approaches available in literature and can be readily
estimated by means of Kalman filtering and expectation maximization. This feature
makes it convenient when the cross-sectional dimension of the portfolio increases. By
applying the model to a portfolio of Dow Jones stocks, we find that the long term
component co-integrates with the market principal factor, while the short term one
captures transient swings of the market associated with the idiosyncratic components
and the correlation structure of returns. Using quantile regressions, we assess the sig-
nificance of the contemporaneous and lagged explanatory power of sentiment on returns
finding strong statistical evidence when extreme returns, especially negative ones, are
considered. Finally, the lagged relation is exploited in a portfolio allocation exercise.
∗Scuola Normale Superiore, Italy. E-mail: danilo.vassallo@sns.it
†University of Bologna, Italy E-mail: giacomo.bormetti@unibo.it
‡University of Bologna and Scuola Normale Superiore, Italy E-mail: fabrizio.lillo@unibo.it
1

Keywords: Sentiment analysis; dynamic factor models; Kalman filter; expectation
maximization; quantile regression
1 Introduction
Nowadays, as Ignacio Ramonet wrote in The Tyranny of Communication, “a single copy of
the Sunday edition of the New York Times contains more information than an educated per-
son in the eighteenth century would consume in a lifetime”. This huge amount of information
cannot be read by a single person. Recent developments in machine learning algorithms for
sentiment analysis help us to categorise and extract signals from text data and pave the way
for a new area of research. The use of these new sources of textual data has become popular
to analyse the relationship between sentiment and other economic variables using economet-
ric techniques. (Algaba et al., 2020) refer to this new strand of literature as Sentometrics.
For instance, (Groß-Klußman and Hautsch, 2011) study the impact of unexpected news on
the displayed quotes in a limit order book, (Sun et al., 2016) show that intraday S&P 500 in-
dex returns are predictable using lagged half-hour investor sentiment, (Antweiler and Frank,
2004; Borovkova and Mahakena, 2015; Allen et al., 2015; Smales, 2015) study the impact of
sentiment on volatility, (Peterson, 2016) investigates the trading strategies based on senti-
ment, (Tetlock, 2007; Garcia, 2013) consider the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) index
predictability using sentiment, (Calomiris and Mamaysky, 2019) show how the predictabil-
ity can be exploited in different markets around the world, (Ranco et al., 2015) analyse the
impact of social media attention on market dynamics, (Borovkova, 2015) develops risk mea-
sures based on sentiment index, and (Lillo et al., 2015) show that different types of investors
react differently to news sentiment.
The approaches to sentiment analysis can be broadly classified into three categories. The
first class is based on (mostly supervised) Machine Learning techniques. Three steps are
typically considered. The first one is to collect textual data forming the training dataset.
The second one is to select the text features for classification and to pre-process the data
2

according to the selection. The final step is to apply a classification algorithm to the textual
data. As an example, (Pang et al., 2002) compare the performance of Naive Bayes, support
vector machines, and maximum entropy algorithm to classify positive or negative movie
reviews. The second category is the lexicon-based approach. It also typically consists of three
steps. The first step is the selection of a dictionary of N words which could be relevant for a
specific topic (e.g. the word great is considered as a positive word to review a movie). The
second one consists in tokenizing the textual data and, for each word in the dictionary, count
how many times it appears in the text. This process can be visualized with a vector of length
N where the i-th element represents the number of times the i-th word of the dictionary is
mentioned in the text. Finally, a measure takes the vector of length N as an input and gives
a quantitative score as an output. One can refer to (Loughran and McDonald, 2011) for a
relevant example in the financial literature. The third and last approach is a combination of
methodologies coming from the first and second approach. For an overview of textual data
treatments and computational techniques, we refer to the review paper (Vohra and Teraiya,
2013) and the book (Liu, 2015).
However, as observed by Zygmunt Bauman in Consuming Life, as the number of infor-
mation increases also the number of useless information increases, and the noise becomes
predominant. Two different non-exclusive methods have been explored in the literature to
remove or, at least, mitigate the impact of useless information. In the first case, a general-
to-specific approach is used directly on the textual data. The amount of information can be
reduced selecting only verified news (i.e. eliminating fake news), considering only the words
which are closely related to the topic of interest, considering the importance of any news (e.g.
Da et al. 2011), selecting only news which appear for the first time (e.g. Thomson Reuters
News Analytics engine uses the novelty variable, see Borovkova et al. 2017 ), or weighting
a news by means of a measure of attention (e.g. with the number of clicks it receives when
published in a news portal Ranco et al. 2016). Obviously, the selection of the relevant data
is application-specific. For instance, fake news may be irrelevant to forecast the GDP of a
3

country but may be crucial to forecast the results of an election (e.g. Allcott and Gentzkow
2017).
In the second case, sentiment time series are directly considered, rather than the text source
they are built from. The observed sentiment is noisy and various approaches have been
proposed to filter it and to recover the latent signal. (Thorsrud, 2018) applies a 60-day mov-
ing average, (Peterson, 2016) uses the Moving Average Convergence-Divergence methodol-
ogy proposed in (Appel, 2003) and (Borovkova and Mahakena, 2015; Audrino and Tetereva,
2019; Borovkova et al., 2017) introduce the Local News Sentiment Level model (LNSL), a
univariate method which takes inspiration from the Local Level model of (Durbin and Koopman,
2012). In spite of its convenience from a practical perspective, the moving average approach
is not statistically sound and the window length is usually chosen following rules of thumb,
which have been tested empirically but lack a clear theoretical motivation. The methods
based on the Kalman-Filter techniques present a natural and computationally simple choice
to extract informative signal. Unfortunately, when multiple assets are considered in the
analysis, the LNSL model does not exploit the multivariate nature of the data. One goal
of this paper is to show that the covariance structure is very informative in sentiment time
series analysis.
The first contribution of this paper is to extend the existing time series methods in the
latter stream of literature. We propose to model noisy sentiment disentangling two differ-
ent sentiment signals. In our approach, the observed sentiment follows a linear Gaussian
state-space model with three relevant components. The first component, named long-term
sentiment is modeled as a random walk, the second component is termed short-term senti-
ment and follows a VAR(1) process, and the last component is an i.i.d Gaussian observation
noise process. We name the novel sentiment state-space model Multivariate Long Short
Sentiment (MLSS). We empirically show that the decomposition provides a better insight
on the nature of sentiment time series, linking the long-term sentiment to the long-term
evolution of the market – proxied by the market factor – while the short-term sentiments
4

reflect transient swing of the market mood and is more related to the market idiosyncratic
components. Specifically, we find that i) the long-term sentiment cointegrates with the first
market factor extracted via PCA; ii) the correlation structure of the short-term sentiment
explains a significant and sizable fraction of correlation of return residuals of a CAPM model.
Finally, we show that the multivariate local level model provides the best description of the
data with respect to alternative models, such as the LNSL.
The second contribution of the paper is to unravel the relation between news and market
returns conditionally on quantile levels. We perform various quantile regressions showing
that sentiment has good explanatory power of returns. When contemporaneous effects are
considered, the result is expected and holds for all models at intermediate quantile levels.
However, when the analysis is focused on abnormal days – i.e. days for which returns belong
to the 1% and 99% quantiles – neither the noisy sentiment nor the filtered sentiment from
an LNSL model explain the observed market returns. The only model achieving statistical
significance is the MLSS. This result shows that it is essential to filter the noisy sentiment
according to the MLSS, which exploits both the multivariate structure of the data and
disentangles the long- and short-term components. Moreover, a test performed on the single
components confirms the intuition that the short-term sentiment is the one responsible for the
contemporaneous explanatory power. The empirical evidence in favor of the MLSS becomes
even more compelling when lagged relations are tested. When a single day lag is considered,
i.e. one tests whether yesterday sentiment explains today returns, the significance of all
models, but MLSS, drops to zero. This result holds across all quantile levels. Instead, for
quantiles smaller than 10% and larger than 90%, the returns predictability for the MLSS
model is highly significant. As before, the decomposition in two time scales is essential
and the short-term component is the one responsible of the effect. The analysis extended
including lagged sentiment – up to five days – confirms previous findings by (Garcia, 2013)
that past sentiment contributes in predicting present returns. Interestingly, this is true for
quantiles between 5% and 10%, both negative and positive, but neither in the median region
5

nor for extreme days. In light of this findings, we finally investigated whether media and
social news immediately digest market returns and whether this relation depends on the
sign of returns. Our results provide a clear picture showing that i) the impact of market
returns on sentiment is significant up to five days in the future when negative extreme
returns – i.e. belonging to quantiles from 1% to 10% – are considered, ii) when positive
returns are considered the impact rapidly fades out and is significant only for quantiles
smaller than 5%, iii) previous findings become not significant if the MLSS sentiment is
replaced by the observed noisy sentiment. Consistently with the intuition provided by these
results, we test whether the returns predictability of the MLSS model can be exploited in a
portfolio allocation exercise. We show that the portfolios generated with the MLSS sentiment
series have higher Sharpe ratio and lower risk than similar portfolios constructed with raw
sentiment or sentiment filtered with the univariate LNSL model. Our model outperforms
also the benchmark constituted by the buy-and-hold equally weighted portfolio. This result
remains true when transaction costs are included.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we develop the multivariate
model for the sentiment and discuss the estimation technique. In section 3, we introduce
the TRMI sentiment index and describe the data used in the analysis. In section 4, we
report the empirical findings and discuss the advantages of the multivariate approach. In
section 5, we compare the various techniques and report the performances of the long-
short sentiment decomposition in explaining daily returns. Section 6 describes the portfolio
allocation strategies using different filtering techniques and assesses the superiority of the
MLSS filter among the others. Section 7 draws the relevant conclusions and sketch possible
future research directions.
2 The Model
Consider K assets and the corresponding K observed daily sentiment series Si where i =
t
1, . . ., K. The observed daily sentiment Si quantifies the opinions of investors and consumers
t
6

about company i. In most cases, the observed sentiment is a continuous number in a compact
set.
The Local News Sentiment Level model (LNSL), presented in (Borovkova and Mahakena,
2015) and subsequently used in (Audrino and Tetereva, 2019), reads as follows
Si = Fi + ǫ , ǫ d 0, σi ,
t t t t ǫ
∼ N
(2.1)
(cid:0) (cid:1)
Fi = Fi + v , v d 0, σi .
t t−1 t t v
∼ N
(cid:0) (cid:1)
for every i = 1, . . ., K. This model is a univariate specification of the Local Level model
of (Durbin and Koopman, 2012). The latent sentiment series Fi are considered as slowly
t
changing components, modeled as independent random walks and the parameters σi and σi
ǫ v
are estimated via maximum likelihood (MLE).
Since the LNSL model does not consider the correlations of the innovations among the
K assets, we can easily derive its multivariate version as
d
S = F + ǫ , ǫ (0, R),
t t t t
∼ N
(2.2)
d
F = F + v , v (0, Q).
t t−1 t t
∼ N
′ ′
where S = S1, . . ., SK and F = F1, . . ., FK are K dimensional vectors, Q is a K K
t t t t t t
×
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
symmetric matrix and R is a K K diagonal matrix. We refer to the multidimensional LNSL
×
model as MLNSL. The synchronous correlation among the innovations of the latent sentiment
are described by the covariance matrix Q, while the correlations among the observation noises
are assumed to be 0. Clearly, the LNSL model is a special case of the MLNSL model when
the matrix Q is diagonal. Since the number of parameters for this model scales as K2,
the MLE of the MLNSL model is computationally demanding. For this reason, we use the
Kalman-EM approach described in (Corsi et al., 2015).
The idea of the LNSL and MLNSL models is that the latent sentiment is a slowly changing
component with a Gaussian disturbance. In their empirical studies, (Audrino and Tetereva,
σ2
2019) observe that the signal to noise ratio v, obtained using the LNSL filter, is very
σ2
ǫ
7

small. This finding indicates that the majority of the daily changes in the sentiment series
can be considered as noise. One possible explanation of this result is that the Local Level
specification of these models is not sufficiently rich to capture all the signals from the observed
sentiment. Indeed, in newspapers and social media there is a consistent amount of articles
and opinions which represent fast trends or rapidly changing consumer preferences. Following
the recent strand of literature on persuasion (Gerber et al., 2011; Hill et al., 2013), these fast
trends have strong but short-lived effects on consumer preferences. Since the (M)LNSL model
interprets the latent sentiment as an integrated series, these signals are considered as noise.
The main contribution of this paper is to define a new model which disentangles the
slowly changing sentiment from a rapidly changing sentiment, that we name short-term
sentiment, and the observation noise. In addition, it is reasonable to think that the slowly
changing components of a set of firms with common characteristics, for instance belonging
to the same sector, market, or country, should be affected by the same trends and shocks.
For this reason, in our model we consider a number q 6 K of common factors driving the
slow component of the sentiment dynamics. We name these common factors as long-term
sentiment. We do not fix the number q a priori, but we select it by means of an information
criterion.
To provide a more quantitative intuition behind our modeling specification, let us consider
the true, but unobserved, daily investor’s mood Mi of asset i. We hypothesize that the today
t
daily mood can be written as
i i i
Mood = Long-term Mood + Short-term Mood . (2.3)
t t t
i, long
The Long-term Mood is composed by the yesterday Long-term Mood plus a shock s ,
t
which is usually small but permanent, i.e.
i i i, long
Long-term Mood = Long-term Mood + s .
t t−1 t
On the contrary, the Short-term Mood is short-lived, but with a strong and highly influential
impact. In particular, the Short-term Mood is composed by a residual part of the yesterday
8

Short-term Mood plus a shock si, short, i.e.
i i i i, short
Short-term Mood = φ Short-term Mood + s .
t t−1 t
In this framework, the long-term shocks permanently change the investor’s mood while the
short-term shocks has an exponentially decaying persistence in the investor’s mood. Equation
(2.3) can be rewritten as
Moodi = Long-term Moodi + si, long + φiShort-term Moodi + si, short . (2.4)
t t−1 t t−1 t
Considering the whole story and the dynamic of the two sentiments shocks, we can rewrite
equation (2.4) as
t t+1
Moodi )t−ksi, short si, long
= (φ + ,
t i k k
X X
k=−∞ k=−∞
i i
Short-term Mood Long-term Mood
t t
| {z } | {z }
i
where we assumed Mood to be negligible and equal to zero. In full generality, the multi-
−∞
variate version of model (2.3) can be formulated as follows
Mood = A Long-term Mood + B Short-term Mood ,
t t t
with A and B being K K matrices. However, in light of the considerations in the previous
×
paragraph, we restrict the matrix B to be the identity matrix. In this way, the Short-term
Mood is purely company-specific. We replace A Long-term Mood with the product between
t
a factor loading matrix and a limited number of long-term and common factors, that is we
rewrite the previous equation as
Mood = Λ Long-term Factor Mood + Short-term Mood , (2.5)
t t t
RK×q
where Λ belongs to with q K. It is important to notice that the significance of
≤
Λ can be statistically tested and the selection of the number q of common factors can be
performed by means of AIC and BIC criteria. Following Audrino and Tetereva (2019), we
assume that the observed sentiment S is a noisy observation of the investors Mood , and we
t t
formulate a state-space model for S consistent with the intuition provided by model (2.5).
t
9

The Multivariate Long Short Sentiment model (MLSS) for the observed sentiment model,
assuming a Gaussian specification for the short-term sentiment shock, long-term sentiment
shock and the observation noise, reads
d
S = ΛF + Ψ + ǫ , ǫ (0, R),
t t t t t
∼ N
Ψ = ΦΨ + u , u d (0, Q ) , (2.6)
t t−1 t t short
∼ N
d
F = F + v , v (0, Q ),
t t−1 t t long
∼ N
RK×K RK×K
where R is the diagonal covariance matrix of the observation noise ǫ , Φ is
t
∈ ∈
RK×K
the matrix of autoregressive coefficients, Q is the covariance matrix of the short-
short
∈
Rq×q
term sentiment innovations, and Q is the covariance matrix of the random walk
long
∈
innovations. In equation (2.6), F and Ψ are the latent processes which proxy the Long-term
t t
Factor Mood and Short-term Mood in (2.5), respectively. Please notice that the essential
difference between equation (2.5) and equation (2.6) is that the observed sentiment, and its
components, are noisy versions of the investors’ mood and its long and short components.
Finally, in this paper, we force a diagonal structure on the matrix Φ, thus neglecting the
possible lead-lag effects among sentiments. This restriction is introduced to limit the curse
of dimensionality of the model.
The estimation of the unknown parameters is based on a combination of the Kalman filter
with Expectation Maximization (Kalman, 1960; Shumway and Stoffer, 1982; Wu et al., 1996;
Harvey, 1990; Banbura and Modugno, 2014; Jungbacker and Koopman, 2008). Given that
model (2.2) is a special case of model (2.6), in Appendix A of the supplementary material
we only consider the estimation procedure of model (2.6).
3 Data
The TRMI sentiment index is constructed using over 700 primary sources, divided in news
and social media, and collects more than two millions articles per day. For any article, a
“bag-of-words” technique is used to create a sentiment score, which lies between 1 and +1,
−
10

a buzz variable1, and one or more asset codes, which in our case refer to companies. The
time resolution of the sentiment data is one minute.
For any asset a, minute s, and day t we denote as Sa the sentiment score and as Buzza
t,s t,s
the buzz variable. Since the following empirical analysis are performed using daily data, we
need to aggregate the TRMI series on a daily basis. TRMI user guide suggests to use the
following equation
t
sh Buzza Sa
s=sht−1
Sa = t,s t,s [ 1, 1] , (3.1)
t P sht Buzza ∈ −
s=sht−1
t,s
P
where Sa refers to the daily sentiment at day t, evaluated on a 24-hour window between
t
t−1 t
the selected hour of day t 1 (sh ) and the selected hour of day t (sh ). Note that the
−
TRMI server provides a daily frequency sentiment, where they use equation (3.1) with sh =
3:30 PM. However, since we want to relate the sentiment series with close to close returns,
we construct the daily sentiment series aggregating the high-frequency sentiment according
to the trading closing hour of the NYSE (sh = 4:00 PM). For more details, please refer to
(Peterson, 2016).
For the empirical analysis, we consider the TRMI sentiment index of 27 out of 302 stocks
of the Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) over the period 03/01/2006 – 29/12/2017. Since
the TRMI index divides the news sentiment from the social sentiment, we have a total of 54
time series. A description of tickers and sectors is available in Appendix D of the supple-
mentary material. Finally, the MLSS model, in its current specification, does not manage
missing values in data, while some of the sentiment time series present missing observations.
The EM algorithm is naturally designed to handle missing observations. However, since the
1
“The buzz field represents a sum of entity-specific words and phrases used in TRMI computations. It can
be non-integer when any of the words/phrases are described with a minimizer, which reduces the intensity
of the primary word or phrase. For example, in the phrase less concerned the score of the word concerned
is minimized by “less”. Additionally, common words such as “new” may have a minor but significant
contribution to the Innovation TRMI. As a result, the scores of common words/phrases with minor TRMI
contributions can be minimized.” See TRMI user guide.
2
We only consider 27 assets because one is missing in the Thomson Reuters dataset and two have an high
ratio of missing values at the beginning of the sample.
11

number of missing values is small3, we fill them using the rolling mean over the last 5 days.
4 Empirical analysis
In this section, we present the results of the estimation of the MLSS model for the investigated
stocks, providing an economic interpretation for the long- and short-term component of the
sentiment. In the analyses, we consider separately the case of news and social sentiment
indicator.
The first quantity to fix is the number q of long-term sentiment factors. Using the
Bayesian information criteria (BIC) we select q = 2 and q = 2.
news social
Table 1 reports the values of Φ and Λ with the estimation errors4. Bold values indicate
parameters which are significantly different from 0 with a p-value smaller than 0.05. We
notice that most of the estimated parameters are statistically significant.
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Figure 1: Goldman Sachs sentiment series. In blue the observed sentiment, in orange the filtered
sentiment including both long-term and short-term component.
As an illustrative example, Figure 1 shows how the filter works for the Goldman Sachs
news sentiment series. We observe that a high fraction of the sentiment daily variation is
captured by the filter. In Appendix E of the supplementary material we quantify more in
detail the signal-to-noise ratio of the proposed filter. We find that the MLSS model has
3
47 out of 54 sentiment series have less than 1% of missing observations. All the series have a percentage
of missing which is smaller than 7.5%
4
Note that the Λ matrices, as discussed in the supplementary material, have the upper triangular sub-
matrix equal to zero.
12

a signal-to-noise ratio approximately twenty times larger than the MLNSL. Moreover, the
noise in social media is generally higher than the noise in newspapers.
The MLSS approach considers two new quantities extracted from the observed sentiment.
The first novelty is the long-term sentiment which, by construction, represents the series of
common trends in a particular basket of sentiment time series. The second novelty is the
multivariate structure of sentiment, extracted using the symmetric matrix Q . In the
short
next sections, we separately analyse the relation between these two quantities and the stock
market prices. To this end, we extract the market factors from the stock prices of these
R27
assets. Denote as r the vector of demeaned close-to-close log-returns and evaluate
t
∈
the unconditional covariance matrix Q and the unconditional correlation matrix C . We
ret ret
extract the factor loading matrix Λmrk Rq mrk×27 using the PCA on the matrix C and define
ret
∈
the return factors R = Λmrkr Rq mrk. We also define the market factors as Mmrk = Λmrkp ,
t t t t
∈
R27
where p is the vector of log-prices. In the following analysis, we consider q = 1
t mrk
∈
and name the first market factor Dow 27.
4.1 Long-term Sentiment
We first investigate the economic meaning of the long-term sentiment. Using the Engle-
Granger test (Engle and Granger, 1987), we observe that one of the factors of the long-
term sentiment is cointegrated with the Dow 27. Figure 2 shows the cointegration relation,
pointing out that the main driver of the prices and the driver of the sentiment time series
reflect the same common information. This result per se is not surprising. However, Figure
3 shows the standardized weights of the cointegrated factors. The weights of the market
factor are very homogeneous across assets, as shown in the top panel, while the weights
of the cointegrated factor of the long-term sentiment are very heterogeneous, as shown in
the bottom panel. The values of the elements of the factor loading matrix Λnews reported
in Table 1 are either positive or negative 5. Then, some firm’s sentiment positively affects
the common sentiment factors, while some other firm’s sentiment negatively affects them.
5 social
The elements of the factor loading matrix Λ are available upon request.
13

Signal to noise
news news
Tickers Φ Λ
MLSS MLNSL
AXP 0.464 1.177 0.623 0.010
(0.029) (0.050)
JPM 0.732 0.169 0.711 0.326 0.023
−
(0.016) (0.035) (0.058)
VZ 0.682 0.545 0.080 0.431 0.029
−
(0.019) (0.038) (0.063)
CVX 0.545 0.103 0.894 0.610 0.022
(0.024) (0.042) (0.071)
GS 0.773 0.239 0.718 0.336 0.029
−
(0.014) (0.036) (0.060)
JNJ 0.407 0.851 0.834 0.788 0.010
(0.030) (0.039) (0.065)
MRK 0.336 0.811 0.885 0.832 0.008
(0.033) (0.036) (0.059)
PFE 0.299 0.530 1.021 1.185 0.007
(0.029) (0.031) (0.052)
UNH 0.374 1.177 0.530 0.574 0.009
(0.037) (0.056) (0.093)
BA 0.585 0.376 0.742 0.896 0.033
(0.021) (0.036) (0.059)
CAT 0.633 0.309 0.045 0.423 0.017
(0.021) (0.064) (0.108)
GE 0.581 1.083 0.196 0.587 0.022
−
(0.023) (0.035) (0.058)
MMM 0.295 0.958 0.072 0.788 0.009
(0.034) (0.038) (0.064)
UTX 0.331 0.422 0.413 0.690 0.011
−
(0.035) (0.057) (0.094)
XOM 0.591 0.058 1.025 0.725 0.031
−
(0.021) (0.039) (0.065)
KO 0.486 0.476 0.245 0.620 0.015
(0.028) (0.033) (0.055)
PG 0.337 0.838 0.623 0.929 0.008
−
(0.031) (0.041) (0.068)
AAPL 0.593 0.221 0.160 1.736 0.096
(0.018) (0.026) (0.043)
CSCO 0.714 1.063 1.094 0.441 0.046
−
(0.017) (0.043) (0.071)
IBM 0.603 0.754 1.269 0.853 0.040
−
(0.020) (0.038) (0.063)
INTC 0.641 0.641 0.299 0.865 0.066
−
(0.018) (0.039) (0.065)
MSFT 0.651 0.858 0.007 0.668 0.053
−
(0.019) (0.026) (0.043)
DIS 0.439 0.454 0.198 1.074 0.013
−
(0.025) (0.028) (0.046)
HD 0.611 1.137 0.232 0.473 0.021
(0.024) (0.058) (0.098)
MCD 0.404 0.291 0.020 1.401 0.013
−
(0.024) (0.034) (0.057)
NKE 0.368 0.664 0.285 0.783 0.010
−
(0.032) (0.046) (0.076)
WMT 0.516 0.147 0.619 0.854 0.022
(0.023) (0.031) (0.052)
14
Table 1: Static parameters of model (2.6) for news sentiment. Values and standard errors of
estimated Λ are multiplied by 103. In parenthesis we show the standard error of the estimated
parameter. The last two columns show the signal to noise ratio for two competing models.

We checked whether the heterogeneity of weights were related with the number of news of
a given asset, or with the buzz index, but we found no significant evidence. Unravelling
the origin of the detected heterogeneity is an interesting research question, that could be
probably answered by looking at the contents of the articles from which the sentiment was
computed. Unfortunately, we do not have access to this kind of information.
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Figure 2: Co-integration between Dow 27, in blue, and the second factor of the news long-term
sentiment, in orange. Time series are scaled.
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
AAPLAXP BA CATCSCOCVX DIS GE GS HD IBMINTCJNJ JPM KO MCDMMMMRKMSFTNKEPFE PG UNHUTX VZ WMTXOM
0.5
0.3
0.1
-0.1
-0.3
-0.5
AAPLAXP BA CATCSCOCVX DIS GE GS HD IBMINTCJNJ JPM KO MCDMMMMRKMSFTNKEPFE PG UNHUTX VZ WMTXOM
Figure 3: Values of the standardized factor loadings of the cointegrated series. Top panel: loadings
of the Dow 27 index. Bottom panel: loadings of the second factor of the news long-term sentiment.
4.2 Short-term Sentiment
The second novelty of the MLSS model is the multivariate structure of the short-term sen-
timent series. The question we want to address in this section is whether the correlation
structure of the short-term sentiment is (linearly) related with the correlation structure
15

|    | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   | None   |
|:---|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|:-------|
|    |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |        |

|    | None   | None   | None   |
|:---|:-------|:-------|:-------|
|    |        |        |        |
|    |        |        |        |

| 0   | 1   |
|:----|:----|
|     |     |

of the daily returns. In the previous section, we observed that one of the factors of the
long-term sentiment is cointegrated with the first market factor. We therefore expect the
short-term sentiment to capture asset-specific features, i.e. we expect a close relation with
the idiosyncratic dynamic of the returns6. To test this intuition for the correlation structure,
we compare the results of the MLSS model with the results of the MLNSL model which,
by construction, does not disentangle the factors from the sentiment series. If the intuition
is correct, the correlation matrix of the sentiment extracted using the MLSS model should
be linearly related with the return correlations and with the idiosyncratic return correla-
tions. On the contrary, the correlation matrix of the sentiment extracted using the MLNSL
model, which only captures the slowly changing dynamics of the sentiment series, and thus
of the first market factor, should be linearly related with the returns correlation but mildly
correlated with the idiosyncratic returns correlations. Finally, to test whether the filtering
procedure is a crucial step in our approach, the correlation matrix of the observed sentiment
is also considered.
We define C as the correlation matrix associated with the covariance matrix Q ,
short short
C the correlation matrix associated with the covariance matrix Q of equation (2.2),
MLNSL
C = Corr (∆S ) the unconditional correlation of the first difference of the observed senti-
Obs t
ment, and C the unconditional correlations matrix of the stock returns. We search for a
ret
linear element-wise relation between C and C , where model is one of short, MLNSL,
ret model
or Obs. The results are reported for the news case only, but the conclusions are similar for
the social sentiment.
We perform a standard ordinary least squares estimation on the model
vechl βmodelvechl
(C ) = α + (C ), (4.1)
ret model
vechl
where (X) is the operator which collects the upper diagonal elements of matrix X in a
column vector. We compare the results obtained using the MLSS model (C = C ),
model short
6
We define idiosyncratic returns as the market returns where the first market factor is removed using the
factor model (4.2)
16

with the results obtained using the MLNSL model (C = C ) and using the Observed
model MLNSL
sentiment (C = C ). In addition, since the unconditional correlation between two
model Obs
assets is higher when they belong to the same sector, we separately consider two cases. In
the first case, we estimate model (4.1) considering all the pairs of assets. In the second case,
we estimate model (4.1) considering only the pairs of assets belonging to the same economic
sector according to Table 8.
The top left panel of Table 2 shows the results with all the correlation pairs. In the first
column we report the R2 of the regression, in the second column we report the F-statistic
and the relative p-value is reported in the third column. The regressions with C and
short
C have high and significant p-values, while the regression with C is not statistically
MLNSL obs
different from the model with the intercept only. This finding has two implications. The
first one is that the sentiment innovations have a similar correlation structure of the returns
innovations. In particular, if the returns of two assets are relatively highly correlated, then
also the increment of the filtered sentiment of the news about these assets are relatively
highly correlated. The second implication is that, if a filtering procedure is not applied on
the observed sentiment data, the noise is too large to find significant results. In the top
right panel of Table 2 we report the results of the model (4.1) applied to the pairs of assets
belonging to the same sector. We observe that the R2 increases for all models. This result
is expected since it is well known that the return correlation is higher and more significant
between two assets of the same sector. However, even if the R2 increases, the number of
pairs decreases. For this reason, the increment in the R2 does not lead to an increment in
the F-statistic, which fails to reject the null hypothesis for the C . This result confirms
obs
that the C matrix is not a significant regressor for C .
obs ret
Comparing the top panels of Table 2, we note that the increment in the R2 is higher for the
MLSS model rather than the MLNSL model. This evidence is consistent with the intuition
that the short-term sentiment series, extracted using the MLSS model, are more related with
the idiosyncratic returns. Indeed the correlation induced by the market factor is predominant
17

All assets Same sector
Models
R2 F-statistic p-value R2 F-statistic p-value
MLSS 13.77 % 55.713 0.0000 37.89 % 23.182 0.0000
MLNSL 15.63 % 64.669 0.0000 28.78 % 15.359 0.0004
Obs 0.95 % 3.330 0.0689 4.19 % 1.662 0.2052
MLSS 11.34 % 44.659 0.0000 30.91 % 17.001 0.0002
MLNSL 4.31 % 15.700 0.0001 7.50 % 3.081 0.0873
Obs 1.01 % 3.554 0.0602 4.88 % 1.950 0.1707
Table 2: Top rows: Results from the linear regression (4.1). Bottom rows: Results from the
linear regression (4.3). Left columns: OLS estimates when all the assets are considered; right
columns: OLS estimates when only the correlations between stocks belonging to the same sector
are considered. Obs rows: estimation based on the observed sentiment.
in the first case, reported in the top left panel, where all the assets are considered, rather
than the second case, reported in the top right panel, where the co-movements are not only
driven by the first market factor, but they are also driven by sector-specific factors.
Now we extract the Dow 27 return from the asset returns using a one-factor model. We
repeat the analysis comparing the matrices C , C and C with the unconditional
short MLNSL Obs
correlation of the idiosyncratic returns. We extract the market factor R from the returns
t
using the factor model
ri = αi + βiR + zi, i = 1, . . ., 27 (4.2)
t t t
∀
where zi N(0, Q˜ ). We then compute the cross-correlation matrix C˜ from the covari-
t ret ret
∼
˜
ance matrix Q and estimate the following model
ret
vechl (C˜ βmodelvechl
) = α + (C ). (4.3)
ret model
The bottom panels of Table 2 report the results. In the bottom left panel we show the
results for the model (4.3) where all the correlation pairs are considered. The first evidence
is that the MLNSL R2 dramatically decreases, while the MLSS R2 remains almost the same.
This finding suggests that almost all the return correlations explained by the C matrix
MLNSL
are associated with the market factor R , while the matrix C , which represents the fast
t short
trends on the sentiment data, also captures different dynamics.
In the bottom right panel, we show the results for the model (4.3) where we consider only
18

the correlation pairs for assets belonging to the same sector. In this case the differences
between the MLSS and MLNSL are more severe. Indeed, the MLSS model still has a high
and highly significant R2, while the F-statistic for the MLNSL model fails to reject the null
that βMLNSL, defined in equation (4.3), is equal to 0. Again, the model with the observed
sentiment has not significant p-values.
As a last observation, we see the different behavior of the sectors in this regression
exercise. Figure 4 reports the scatter plot of the elements of C versus the corresponding
short
values of C when the two stocks belong to the same economic sector, characterized by a
ret
specific marker. We also superimpose the regression line obtained from equation (4.1). Note
that the behavior is different among sectors. The financial sector, marked with blue dots, is
the one with highest linear relation and the three assets belonging to this sector have all high
returns and sentiment correlations. On the contrary, the consumer cyclical sector, marked
with garnet-red triangles, has a high dispersion among the correlations of the 5 assets.
0.8
0.75
0.7
0.65
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
-0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45
Figure 4: Scatter plot of the news short-term sentiment correlations and the return correlations
for pairs of assets in the same sector. The line corresponds to the regression (4.1).
In summary, Sections 4.1 and 4.2 support the intuition behind the MLSS model. Indeed,
the slowly changing components of the sentiment are effectively captured by the long-term
sentiment. We successfully confirmed this hypothesis in Section 4.1. At the same time, the
short-term sentiment effectively describes the firm-specific behavior of the returns. Section
4.2 shows that the MLSS model can capture different features of the returns, while the
19

MLNSL mainly captures the sentiment component associated with the market.
5 Contemporaneous and lagged relations
The goal of this section is to assess the explanatory power of the sentiment with respect to
the market returns using the different filters presented in the previous sections. In particular,
we show that both the extraction of long-term and short-term sentiment components and
the multivariate specification of the model are crucial ingredients to capture the synchronous
and lagged effects.
We consider the asset prices Pi of the 27 stocks of the Dow 30 and construct the equally
t
weighted portfolio
27
1
M = Pi (5.1)
t t
27
X
i=1
as a representative portfolio and denote with rm its log-returns. We consider a representative
t
portfolio for two reasons. Firstly, (Beckers, 2018) shows that the returns predictability using
sentiment indicators is higher when using market indexes rather than single stocks. Secondly,
using a representative portfolio we can compare different filtering techniques which do or do
not consider the multivariate structure.
We define S¯news = 1 27 Si,news and S¯social = 1 27 Si,social as the sentiment associated to
t 27 i=1 t t 27 i=1 t
P P
the representative portfolio. We consider five different filtering techniques defined as follow:
1. SMLSS is the filtered signal obtained using the MLSS model in equation (2.6). The
t
resulting filtered quantities are 4 long-term sentiment factors FMLSS, 2 for the news
t
and 2 for the social sentiment, and 54 short-term sentiment series ΨMLSS, 27 for the
t
news and 27 for the social sentiment. We compute the cross-sectional average for the
¯MLSS,news ¯MLSS,social
news short-term sentiment Ψ and social short-term sentiment Ψ .
t t
As a final result, we define
′
SMLSS = ∆FMLSS,news , ∆FMLSS,social , Ψ¯MLSS,news , Ψ¯MLSS,social R6.
t t t t t
∈
h i
20

2. SLSS is the filtered signal obtained applying the MLSS model directly to the univariate
t
S¯news S¯social.
series and For identifiability reasons, the number of common factors is
t t
one. The motivation behind this model is to test whether a simple cross-sectional
average of sentiment time series can be an effective proxy of the sentiment of the
representative asset. This approach intentionally neglects the multivariate structure of
the sentiment and treats it as a non relevant feature. A similar reasoning has been used
in (Borovkova et al., 2017). The resulting filtered quantities are 2 long-term sentiment
factors FLSS, one for the news and one for the social sentiment, and 2 short-term
t
Ψ¯LSS,
sentiment series one for the news and one for the social sentiment. The final
t
model reads
′
SLSS = ∆FLSS,news , ∆FLSS,social , Ψ¯LSS,news , Ψ¯LSS,social R4.
t t t t t
∈
h i
3. SMLNSL is the filtered signal obtained using the MLNSL model in equation (2.2) from
t
the 54 observed sentiment time series. The resulting filtered quantities are 54 filtered
sentiment series FMLNSL, 27 for the news and 27 for the social sentiment. We compute
t
¯MLNSL,news
the cross-sectional average for the news sentiment F and social sentiment
t
¯MLNSL,social
F . As a final result, we define
t
′
SMLNSL = ∆F¯MLNSL,news , ∆F¯MLNSL,social R2.
t t t
∈
h i
4. SLNSL is the filtered signal obtained applying the LNSL model, introduced by (Borovkova and Mahakena,
t
S¯news S¯social.
2015) and presented in equation (2.1), to and As for the LSS model, the
t t
motivation behind this choice is to test whether the multivariate structure of sentiment
F¯LNSL,
is a relevant feature or not. We obtain two filtered sentiment series one for the
t
news and one for the social sentiment. We then define
′
SLNSL = ∆F¯LNSL,news , ∆F¯LNSL,social R2.
t t t
∈
h i
5. Sobs only considers the observed sentiment S¯news and S¯social
t t t
21

SObs = ∆S¯news, ∆S¯social ′ R2.
t t t
∈
(cid:2) (cid:3)
In summary, the five models allow us to separate the effect of the different components. The
MLSS model exploits all the possible information from the multivariate time series and all
the relevant common factors are considered. The average across assets is computed at a
later stage on the short-term sentiment. For this reason, it does not affect the long-term
components. The LSS model computes the cross-sectional average as a first step and does
not exploit the multivariate structure. Then, both the short-term and long-term components
are different from the one of the MLSS model. The MLNSL and LNSL models differ only
on the step of the aggregation. The first model applies the filter on the multivariate time
series, while the second model applies the filter on the aggregated time series. Finally, the
Obs model works as a benchmark.
5.1 Quantile regression
In this section, we investigate the lagged relation between sentiment and market returns.
The recent literature for the DJIA (Garcia, 2013) and for the gold futures (Smales, 2014)
found that the reaction to news is more pronounced during recessions. For this reason, we use
the quantile regression in place of a simple linear regression to obtain a more comprehensive
analysis of the relationship between variables. In Appendix F of the supplementary material
we report the investigation on the contemporaneous relation between sentiment and returns.
5.1.1 Lagged relations
We consider the following quantile regression
rm(τ) = α (τ) + βmodel (τ) Smodel ,
t−h
where model denotes one of the five filtering models presented above. According to (Koenker and Machado,
1999), we can compare the explanatory power of a selected model according to the R1 mea-
22

R1(τ) measure
τ quantiles
MLSS LSS MLNSL LNSL Obs
0.01 12.7%∗∗∗ 4.5% 0.3% 0.2% 0.1%
0.05 3.2%∗∗∗ 1.3%∗∗ 0.1% 0.0% 0.1%
0.10 1.7%∗∗∗ 1.2%∗∗∗ 0.0% 0.0% 0.1%
0.33 0.2% 0.1% 0.0% 0.0% 0.0%
0.50 0.2%∗ 0.1% 0.1% 0.1% 0.0%
0.66 0.4%∗∗ 0.2% 0.1% 0.1% 0.0%
0.90 2.8%∗∗∗ 1.0%∗∗∗ 0.2% 0.1% 0.1%
0.95 5.3%∗∗∗ 1.6%∗∗∗ 0.3% 0.1% 0.2%
0.99 11.9%∗∗∗ 3.4% 0.0% 0.5% 1.0%
Table 3: The R1 measure across the value τ for the one-lag quantile regression. We denote with
∗∗∗ the significance at 1%, ∗∗ the significance at 5% and ∗ the significance at 10%
sure. In particular, if we consider the functional expression for the quantile regression
T
Vˆ (τ) = min ρ (rm α βS ), (5.2)
τ t t−h
− −
(α,β)
X
t=1
where ρ (u) = u(τ I ), we can define the quantile R1 measure as
τ u<0
−
ˆ
V (τ)
R1 (τ) = 1 ,
− V˜ (τ)
˜
where V (τ) is evaluated restricting equation (5.2) with the intercept parameter only. In
contrast with the R2 measure of the linear models, R1(τ) is a local measure of goodness of
fit and only applies to a particular quantile. In addition, (Koenker and Machado, 1999) show
that using Vˆ we can test the significance of the βmodel parameters. Considering βmodel = 0
as the null hypothesis and F as the probability distribution of the i.i.d. residuals u , the
i
{ }
statistic
˜ ˆ
2(V (τ) V (τ))
L (τ) = − χ2 (5.3)
T q
τ(1 τ)s(τ) →
−
where q is the dimension of βmodel and s(τ) = 1/f(F−1(τ)).
As a first step, we consider h = 1. We evaluate the R1(τ) statistic and test the significance
using the χ2-test. Table 3 reports the values and significance of the R1 measure. A finding
is common among all models: the values of R1 are higher in the tails and lower close to the
median. In addition, what we observe is extremely promising for the Long-Short modeling
23

approach. The significance of the noisy sentiment is zero for all quantile levels. Filtering
the time series is essential to recover predictability. However, filtering alone is not sufficient.
Indeed, neither the predictability of the LSNL model nor of the multivariate extension ML-
SNL is statistically significant. Significance is recovered only when the filtered sentiment is
decomposed into the short-run and long-run components. This is true for extreme returns,
both positive and negative. The result is stronger when the LSS model is replaced by the
MLSS, meaning that the cross-sectional dependence is an important ingredient to enhance
predictability.
A further advantage of the long-short decomposition is that we can properly asses the rel-
ative contribution of the two components. In particular, we use equation (5.3) to test the sig-
nificance of the parameters in the MLSS model. Considering the SMLSS = ∆FMLSS, Ψ¯MLSS ,
t t
(cid:2) (cid:3)
the significance of the parameter βLT R4 and βST R2 can be tested using
∈ ∈
T
V˜LT (τ) = min ρ rm α βLT∆FMLSS
τ t t−h
LT − −
(α,β )
X t=1 (cid:0) (cid:1)
and
T
V˜ST (τ) = min ρ rm α βSTΨ¯MLSS ,
τ t t−h
ST − −
(α,β )
X t=1 (cid:0) (cid:1)
which lead to the statistics
2(V˜ST(τ) Vˆ
(τ))
LLT(τ) = − χ2 (5.4)
4
τ(1 τ)s(τ) →
−
and
2(V˜LT(τ) Vˆ
(τ))
LST(τ) = − χ2 . (5.5)
2
τ(1 τ)s(τ) →
−
We report the p-values of the test statistics (5.4) and (5.5) in Table 4. The contribution
given by the short-term sentiment is strongly significant, in particular for extreme quantiles.
On the contrary, the long-term sentiment is not significant in 6 out of 9 quantiles. The
results support the intuition that, if today a very high or very low return appears, it can be
partially explained by the yesterday’s rapidly changing mood, while the permanent trend in
the sentiment series have almost no impact.
24

p-values
τ quantiles
LST LLT
t−1 t−1
0.01 0.020% 67.688%
0.05 0.000% 66.738%
0.10 0.003% 73.881%
0.33 5.069% 66.668%
0.50 16.360% 59.465%
0.66 7.692% 7.411%
0.90 0.000% 0.011%
0.95 0.000% 1.789%
0.99 0.001% 57.969%
Table 4: p-values for the statistics LST χ2 and LLT χ2 defined in a similar fashion to
t−1 2 t−1 4
∼ ∼
equations (5.5) and (5.4).
The experiments performed in the contemporaneous (see Appendix F in the supplemen-
tary material) and one-lag cases show that the MLSS model is the best model to capture
the return variations. For this reason, for the multi-period analysis we will only consider the
MLSS model.
Considering a general h, we wonder if extra lags can add explanatory power to the regression
exercise. Using the functional form
T
Vˆh,MLSS (τ) = min ρ rm α0 α1rm β1SMLSS β2 (SMLSS) ,
τ t t−1 t−1 h−1 t−1
− − − − L
( α0,α1β1∈R6,β2∈R6(h−1))
t=X h+1 (cid:0) (cid:1)
we separate the contributions given by the first and higher order lags. Under the null
hypothesis that β2 = 0, the statistic
2(Vˆ1,MLSS(τ) Vˆh,MLSS(τ))
h,MLSS 2
L (τ) = − χ . (5.6)
t−h τ(1 τ)s(τ) → 6(h−1)
−
Following (Tetlock, 2007; Garcia, 2013), we fix a maximum number of h = 5 and Table 5
reports the p-values for the different values of h. The h-lagged sentiment series are unin-
formative in the median region, where the one lag sentiment have less explanatory power
too. However, in agreement with (Garcia, 2013), the lagged sentiment remains informative
for few days and, in our case, this is true for the 5%, 10%, 90%, and 95% quantile levels. It
is worth noticing that the 1% and 99% quantiles are unaffected by higher-order lags. This
shows that, in case of very good or very bad days, the returns are strongly driven by very
25

τ h = 2 h = 3 h = 4 h = 5
0.01 18.133% 29.136% 57.652% 72.784%
0.05 0.618% 0.946% 4.317% 3.009%
0.10 0.907% 0.773% 4.341% 1.968%
0.33 65.530% 47.389% 74.932% 74.071%
0.50 62.489% 70.078% 80.725% 90.581%
0.66 43.722% 53.518% 52.853% 74.962%
0.90 4.831% 0.662% 0.063% 0.208%
0.95 12.800% 2.504% 0.628% 2.468%
0.99 38.580% 71.448% 81.945% 87.196%
Table 5: p-values for the statistics defined in equation (5.6) for different values of h. Bold values
correspond to β2 significantly different from zero.
fresh news (h = 1) while the older news have no informative power.
6 Portfolio allocation with sentiment data
This section details an economic application of the MLSS model in portfolio selection and
benckmarks the results against a buy-and-hold strategy. We consider the equally weighted
portfolio in equation (5.1) and the five filtered signals SMLSS, SLSS, SMLNSL, SLNSL and
t t t t
SObs introduced in the previous section. It is worth noticing that (Beckers, 2018) and (Garcia,
t
2013) showed that the predictability power of the sentiment series declined after 2007. For
this reason, we want to challenge the filtering techniques to predict the future daily returns
in the time window 2007-2019.
In the first part of this section, we use the sentiment signals as exogenous variables to
build a simple classifier and we introduce five trading strategies based on the five sentiment
time series. Then, we test these strategies on the February 2007 - June 2017 window. This
period offers a large series with different economic conditions. The sentiment models are
estimated in the same time window. The estimation of multivariate models (MLSS and
MLNLS) employs a backward looking technique based on smoothing recursions. Then, one
may argue that for the multivariate case the estimation technique may introduce some sort
of forward looking bias. We claim that this bias, if any, is negligible and we perform a
robustness check where we use the parameter values from February 2007 - June 2017 period
26

to filter the TRMI sentiment series from July 2017 to December 2019. In this way, the
trading signals cannot be affected by any forward looking bias. The results in the out-
of-sample period confirm those from February 2007 - June 2017, showing that the trading
strategies built on the MLSS model are the best performers. The details of the robustness
check can be found in Appendix H of the supplementary material.
6.1 Trading strategies
In the financial literature, several papers support the strong out-of-sample performance of
the equally weighted portfolio (e.g. DeMiguel et al. 2009). The 1/n portfolio is used as a
baseline for our trading strategies and the long passive position in this portfolio is called
buy-and-hold strategy. Given that the buy-and-hold portfolio offers a good out-of-sample
performance, we assume an investor who only deviates from the baseline strategy if a strong
signal which predicts a negative return arrives from the sentiment series. For this reason,
the criterion variable needs to capture the behavior of the left tail of returns distribution.
We define the criterion binary variable as
1, for r˜m < z
 t 1/3
Y =
t


0, otherwise


where z is the 1/3 Gaussian quantile and r˜m = rm/√RV are the standardized market
1/3 t t t
returns with the realized variance, RV , evaluated by means of 5-minute intraday returns.
t
The standardization of the returns is crucial to eliminate possible effects due to the persis-
tence of volatility. The choice of the 33% quantile is consistent with the findings of Section
5.1.1. Moreover, it is a balance between a more conservative choice – a smaller quantile only
sensitive to more extreme and predictive events – and a larger quantile, which provides a
larger number of selling signals but less predictive power.
Since the goal of this paper is to show that the choice of the filtering procedure is essential,
a simple classification technique is used. As a classifier, we consider the following conditional
27

logit model
P (Y = 1 X ) = logit Xmodθ , (6.1)
t+1 t t
|
(cid:0) (cid:1)
eXtθ
where logit(X θ) = and Xmod = 1, r˜m, Smod . We recall that Smod is a vector whose
t 1+eXtθ t t t t
(cid:2) (cid:3)
dimension depends on the filtering model. For further details see the first part of Section 5.
The predicted binary value is defined as
1, for logit(Xmodθ) > 0.5
Yˆmod  t
= (6.2)
t+1 

0, otherwise .


The main advantages of the conditional logit model are twofold. On one hand, the condi-
tional logit model can be easily estimated using MLE. On the other hand, we can easily
assess the fitness of the model on the data using the Mc Fadden’s R2 measure defined in
(McFadden et al., 1973) as
log(L )
R2 = 1 m [0, 1].
− log(L ) ∈
0
L represents the maximum likelihood of the complete model (6.1) and L is the maximum
m 0
likelihood of the bare model based only on the intercept. The models are estimated using
overlapping rolling windows of 6 months (126 observations). We verified that this choice is
sufficient to capture the time-varying nature of the explanatory power of the sentiment series.
Figure 5 shows the value of R2 over the February 2007 - June 2017 period. The MLSS model
has the highest R2 w.r.t the other models, which typically translates in a higher predictive
power. In addition, the MLSS R2 has a high variability, suggesting that the predictive power
changes through time. This latter finding suggests that the sentiment signal can be a good
returns predictor in certain periods and a poor predictor in others. This intuition will be
exploited later to generate trading strategies based on the R2. The estimated Y¯mod defined
t
in (6.2) translates in the trading signal
Yˆmod
1, if = 0
smod =  t+1 (6.3)
t+1 
 Yˆmod
1, if = 1
t+1
−


28

Figure 5: McFadden’s R2 for the different filtering methods using negative abnormal returns.
where smod = 1 (smod = 1) represents a buy (sell) signal in the equally weighted portfolio
t+1 t+1
−
(5.1). At any day t, at the closing time of the trading day, the investor uses the sentiment
signal Smod and the standardized realized daily returns r˜m to forecast the binary variable
t t
Yˆmod
and the relative trading signal. Naming c the number of shares bought or sold in any
t+1 0
transaction, there are three possible scenarios
1. smod = smod : In this case the prediction on the future realization does not change and
t t+1
the investor does not re-balance the portfolio.
2. smod = +1 and smod = 1 : The investor had a long position in the equally weighted
t t+1
−
portfolio at time t but the prediction changed. She sells the current position and short
sells c shares of the same portfolio.
0
3. smod = 1 and smod = +1 : The investor had a short position in the equally weighted
t t+1
−
portfolio at time t but the prediction changed. She buys 2c shares of the portfolio.
0
Please notice that the only exception is for smod because we initialized smod = 0. In this case,
1 0
the equally weighted portfolio is bought when smod = 1 and it is short sold when smod = 1.
1 1
−
The investor’s portfolio is then built as
Pmod = smodc M + cash ,
 t+1 t+1 0 t+1 t+1
(6.4)



cash = cash (smod smod)c M smod smod c M cost ,
t+1 t − t+1 − t 0 t+1 − | t+1 − t | 0 t+1 2



29

where cost is the percentage trading cost and M is defined in (5.1). The first equation in
t
(6.4) shows that the value of the portfolio is composed by the value of the invested amount
smodc M plus the cash position. The latter increases when smod < smod, meaning that the
t+1 0 t+1 t+1 t
investor sells the portfolio and receives cash, and decreases when smod > smod, meaning that
t+1 t
the investor buys and erodes the cash position. The second equation includes the impact of
the transaction costs. Specifically, every time that a transaction happens, i.e. smod = smod,
t+1 t
6
the investor pays an extra cost proportional to the current value of the equally weighted
portfolio M .
t+1
We fix the starting point smod = 0, cash = 100, 000$ and the parameter c = 100, 000$/M .
0 0 0 0
In the paper we only report the results for the case with trading costs, while the results
with zero trading costs are reported in Appendix G of the supplementary material. From
now on, we refer to without trading costs when the portfolio in equation (6.4) is evaluated
with cost = 0 and to with trading costs when costs = 0.1% as in (Gilli and Schumann,
2009) and (Avellaneda and Lee, 2010). In the following sections, the number of transac-
tions is evaluated as Trmod = T−1 smod smod and the transaction costs are evaluated as
i=0 i+1 i
| − |
P
Tcmod = T−1 smod smod c M cost. It is worth noticing that the change of signal effec-
i=0 | i+1 − i | 0 i+1 2
P
tively produces two transactions. For instance, if the signal moves from s = 1 to s = 1,
t t+1
−
the first transaction is the liquidation of the long position and the second transaction is the
short position on the asset. In addition, most of the time the selling signal appears for only
one day and disappears the day after. Then, the typical path of a selling signal is given by
s = 1, s = 1 and s = 1 producing a total of four transactions.
t t+1 t+2
−
The transaction costs can strongly depress the overall performance of the portfolio. To
partially mitigate this drawback, we can decrease the number of transactions using the
McFadden’s R2 as a measure of the reliability of the signal Yˆmod. We compute the empirical
t
quantile z1,t (R2) of the McFadden R2 over the time window (1, , t). The quantile z1,t (R2)
α α
· · ·
is -measurable and does not introduce a forward looking bias. We can reduce the number
t
F
of trades conditioning the selling signal at time t on the level of the McFadden’s R2 evaluated
30

$andtheparameterc = 100,000$

in the previous 6 months. The R2 adjusted trading signal is then defined as follows
1, if Yˆmod = 1 and R2,mod > z1,t R2,mod
s¯mod =  − t+1 t α (6.5)
t  (cid:0) (cid:1)

1, otherwise .


The value α determines the reduction in the number of trades. The higher α is, the smaller
is the number of transactions. The five strategies, together with the buy-and-hold strategy
itself, are evaluated according to six measures, the annual return, the annual volatility, the
annual negative volatility, the Sharpe ratio, the Sortino ratio, and the maximum drawdown
(MDD). In the next section, in a first step, the portfolios with the trading signals (6.3) with
and without trading cost are analysed. Then, we assess the impact and the performance of
the trade reduction strategy based on (6.5).
6.2 Empirical application: February 2007 - June 2017
The 2007-2009 crisis and the 2009-2017 bull market are good backtesting periods for the
sentiment portfolios because we can test the return predictability during different market
conditions.
Table 6 reports the performances of the five sentiment strategies together with the buy-
and-hold portfolio with trading costs. The sentiment-based strategies have, excluding the
LNSL and the Obs, a smaller volatility and MDD than the buy-and-hold portfolio. In
addition, the MLSS portfolio produces returns similar to the buy-and-hold strategy, lower
negative volatility, and consequently higher Sharpe and Sortino ratios than all the other
strategies. The lower performance for the annual returns is due to the higher transaction
costs. Indeed in Appendix G of the supplementary material we show that, when the trading
costs are not considered, the MLSS strategy produces higher annual returns than all the
other strategies. In addition, when we compare without trading costs experiment with the
with trading costs experiment, the excessive number of transactions for the MLSS strategy
reduces the Sharpe ratio gain with respect to the buy-and-hold portfolio from 40% to 10%
and the Sortino ratio gain from 48% to 16%. In Appendix I of the supplementary material
31

Measures BH MLSS LSS MLNSL LNSL Obs
A. return (%) 8.975 7.891 6.977 8.882 8.143 6.986
A. volatility (%) 19.132 15.209 18.136 17.952 19.431 19.955
A. neg. volatility (%) 15.523 11.767 14.339 14.474 15.374 16.055
A. Sharpe ratio 0.469 0.519 0.385 0.495 0.419 0.35
A. Sortino ratio 0.578 0.671 0.487 0.614 0.53 0.435
MDD ($) 59377 57235 50335 49773 63595 62785
Number of trades 1 553 161 81 73 93
Transaction costs ($) 50 37974 14866 5565 4085 7544
Table 6: Performances of the six strategies with transaction cost for the period February 2007 -
June 2017. In bold, the best performance per row. BH is the buy-and-hold portfolio, while MLSS,
LSS, MLNSL, LSNSL, and Obs correspond to portfolios built from the corresponding model for
the sentiment time series.
we show that the selling signal generated by the MLSS sentiment series corresponds to
statistically significant returns predictability. The transaction costs incurred by the MLSS
portfolio throughout the nine years amount in total to 38% of the starting capital. For this
reason, we employ the trading signal s¯MLSS defined in equation (6.5), which penalizes signals
with moderate McFadden’s R2. Table 7 reports the performances of the strategies based on
the penalized signal for different values of α. As expected, the higher the value of α and the
lower the number of transactions is. In addition, the R2-based signal produces higher quality
signal and effectively increases the performance of the portfolios. The number of transactions
decreases almost linearly but the Sharpe and Sortino ratios strongly increase. They reach
a maximum value when α = 0.65. These findings further corroborate the intuition that the
MLSS sentiment strongly anticipates future returns during the financial crisis, given that the
R2 values in figure 5 are higher than the unconditional average during the 2007 2009 period.
−
Again this feature is peculiar for the MLSS filter while no evidence of return predictability
is reported for the other filtering techniques. Again, the statistical significance of these
strategies is reported in Appendix I of the supplementary material.
32

Measures BH α = 0% α = 20% α = 35% α = 50% α = 65% α = 80%
A. return (%) 8.975 7.891 8.225 9.575 9.84 10.248 9.184
A. volatility (%) 19.132 15.209 15.679 14.083 13.601 13.538 17.201
A. neg. volatility (%) 13.601 10.888 11.196 9.901 9.511 9.443 12.216
A. Sharpe ratio 0.469 0.519 0.525 0.680 0.723 0.757 0.534
A. Sortino ratio 0.660 0.725 0.735 0.967 1.035 1.085 0.752
MDD ($) 59377 57235 63522 49160 33264 35600 59486
Number of trades 1 553 437 349 273 169 57
Transaction costs ($) 50 37974 30626 25283 20074 12007 4127
Table 7: Performances of the MLSS based strategies built from equation (6.5) for different values
of α 100. BH is the buy-and-hold portfolio. In bold, the best performance per row.
×
7 Conclusions
In this paper, we presented a novel way to filter multivariate sentiment time series. The
approach is very general and encompasses previous models discussed in the literature. Us-
ing a dynamic factor model, we were able to identify two different sentiment components.
The first one, named long-term sentiment and modeled as a random walk, captures the
common trends which drive the long-term dynamics. The second component, dubbed short-
term sentiment and modeled as a VAR(1) process, captures short-term swings of market
mood. An extensive empirical section investigates the different features of the two sentiment
components. In a first analysis, we pointed out that one of the long-term sentiment fac-
tors co-integrates with the first principal component of the market. Quite surprisingly, the
structure of the sentiment factor loadings does not mimic the typical uniform profile of the
market factor. Some assets are over-expressed and contribute to the factor with a positive
or negative sign, while others are under-expressed. Concerning the short-term sentiment,
its multivariate dependence structure explains a sizable fraction of the residual covariance
in a single factor market model. This result suggests that the short-term component cap-
tures transient and rapidly changing trends associated with the idiosyncratic components of
the market. In a second analysis, based on quantile regression, we showed that the Multi-
variate Long-Short Sentiment model provides the highest explanatory power of lagged and
contemporaneous returns. Essential to achieve statistical significance are the multivariate
33

nature of the approach and the separation of the sentiment signal in a long and a short
component. In particular, disentangling the short-term sentiment is crucial to capture the
behavior of extreme returns. In a further analysis, we observed that newspapers and social
media differently react to negative and positive returns. Specifically, they can effectively
explain abnormal returns from one to five days in advance, but they almost immediately
digest the positive market realizations while they echo negative realizations for several days
to come.
It is worth noting that (Tetlock, 2007) and (Garcia, 2013) reported results similar to ours for
the unfiltered sentiment focusing on period before 2007. Using the TRMI dataset, (Beckers,
2018) showed that the forecasting power on returns of the sentiment dropped dramatically
after 2007. Our results suggest that the filtering procedures are more important nowdays
than in the past. Consistently, in a final investigation, we performed an asset allocation
exercise where the selling signal are based on the sentiment series. In line with results from
the quantile regression, the portfolio based on the MLSS filter significantly outperforms
the benchmark buy-and-hold strategy and the other strategies based on different filtering
techniques.
Supplementary materials
The supplementary materials include the details of the estimation procedure in Appendix A as well
as the details of Kalman filter and smoother in Appendix B and the equations of the Expectation
Maximization algorithm in Appendix C. Appendix D provides an overview of the stocks used in the
empirical analysis. Appendix E compares the different signal-to-noise ratios filtered by the MLSS
and MLNSL model. Appendix F investigates the contemporaneous relation between the sentiment
and return series. Appendices G, H, and I report the without trading costs analysis, the robustness
check, and the statistical significance of the portfolio allocation exercise, respectively.
34

Acknowledgments
The authors thank Thomson Reuters for kindly providing Thomson Reuters MarketPsych Indices
time series. We benefited from discussion with Giuseppe Buccheri, Fulvio Corsi, Luca Trapin, as
well as with conference participants to the Quantitative Finance Workshop 2019 at ETH in Zurich
and the AMASES XLIII Conference in Perugia.
References
Algaba, A., Ardia, D., Bluteau, K., Borms, S., Boudt, K., 2020. Econometrics meets sentiment:
An overview of methodology and applications. Journal of Economic Surveys .
Allcott, H., Gentzkow, M., 2017. Social media and fake news in the 2016 election. Journal of
Economic Perspectives 31, 211–36.
Allen, D., McAleer, M., Singh, A., 2015. Machine news and volatility: The Dow Jones Industrial
Average and the TRNA real-time high-frequency sentiment series. Handbook of High Frequency
Trading , 327–344.
Antweiler, W., Frank, M.Z., 2004. Is all that talk just noise? The information content of internet
stock message boards. The Journal of Finance 59, 1259–1294.
Appel, G., 2003. Become your own technical analyst: How to identify significant market turning
points using the moving average convergence-divergence indicator or macd. The Journal of
Wealth Management 6, 27–36.
Audrino, F., Tetereva, A., 2019. Sentiment spillover effects for US and European companies. Journal
of Banking & Finance 106, 542 – 567.
Avellaneda, M., Lee, J.H., 2010. Statistical arbitrage in the US equities market. Quantitative
Finance 10, 761–782.
Banbura, M., Modugno, M., 2014. Maximum likelihood estimation of factor models on datasets
with arbitrary pattern of missing data. Journal of Applied Econometrics 29, 133–160.
Beckers, S., 2018. Do social media trump news? The relative importance of social media and news
based sentiment for market timing. The Journal of Portfolio Management 45, 58–67.
Bork, L., 2009. Estimating US monetary policy shocks using a factor-augmented vector autore-
gression: an EM algorithm approach. Available at SSRN 1358876 .
35

Borovkova, S., 2015. The role of news in commodity markets. Available at SSRN 2587285 .
Borovkova, S., Garmaev, E., Lammers, P., Rustige, J., 2017. SenSR: A sentiment-based systemic
risk indicator. Technical Report 553. De Nederlandsche Bank. .
Borovkova, S., Mahakena, D., 2015. News, volatility and jumps: the case of natural gas futures.
Quantitative Finance 15, 1217–1242.
Calomiris, C.W., Mamaysky, H., 2019. How news and its context drive risk and returns around the
world. Journal of Financial Economics 133, 299–336.
Corsi, F., Peluso, S., Audrino, F., 2015. Missing in asynchronicity: A Kalman-EM approach for
multivariate realized covariance estimation. Journal of Applied Econometrics 30, 377–397.
Da, Z., Engelberg, J., Gao, P., 2011. In search of attention. The Journal of Finance 66, 1461–1499.
DeMiguel, V., Garlappi, L., Uppal, R., 2009. Optimal versus naive diversification: How inefficient
is the 1/N portfolio strategy? The Review of Financial Studies 22, 1915–1953.
Dempster, A.P., Laird, N.M., Rubin, D.B., 1977. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via
the EM algorithm. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological) , 1–38.
Durbin, J., Koopman, S.J., 2012. Time series analysis by state space methods. Oxford University
Press.
Engle, R.F., Granger, C.W.J., 1987. Co-integration and error correction: Representation, estima-
tion, and testing. Econometrica 55, 251–276.
Garcia, D., 2013. Sentiment during recessions. The Journal of Finance 68, 1267–1300.
Gerber, A.S., Gimpel, J.G., Green, D.P., Shaw, D.R., 2011. How large and long-lasting are the per-
suasive effects of televised campaign ads? Results from a randomized field experiment. American
Political Science Review 105, 135–150.
Gilli, M., Schumann, E., 2009. An empirical analysis of alternative portfolio selection criteria. Swiss
Finance Institute, Swiss Finance Institute Research Paper Series .
Groß-Klußman, A., Hautsch, N., 2011. When machines read the news: Using automated text
analytics to quantify high frequency news-implied market reactions. Journal of Empirical Finance
18, 321–340.
Harvey, A.C., 1990. Estimation, prediction and smoothing for univariate structural time series
models. Cambridge University Press. pp. 168 – 233.
36

Hill, S.J., Lo, J., Vavreck, L., Zaller, J., 2013. How quickly we forget: The duration of persuasion
effects from mass communication. Political Communication 30, 521–547.
Jungbacker, B., Koopman, S.J., 2008. Likelihood-based analysis for dynamic factor models. Tin-
bergen Institute, Tinbergen Institute Discussion Papers .
Kalman, R.E., 1960. A new approach to linear filtering and prediction problems. Transactions of
the ASME–Journal of Basic Engineering 82, 35–45.
Koenker, R., Machado, J.A.F., 1999. Goodness of fit and related inference processes for quantile
regression. Journal of the American Statistical Association 94, 1296–1310.
Lillo, F., Miccich´e, S., Tumminello, M., Piilo, J., Mantegna, R.N., 2015. How news affect the
trading behavior of different categories of investors in a financial market. Quantitative Finance
15, 213–229.
Liu, B., 2015. Sentiment analysis: Mining opinions, sentiments, and emotions. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Loughran, T., McDonald, B., 2011. When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis, dictionaries,
and 10-ks. The Journal of Finance 66, 35–65.
McFadden, D., et al., 1973. Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior .
Pang, B., Lee, L., Vaithyanathan, S., 2002. Thumbs up? Sentiment classification using machine
learning techniques, in: Proceedings of the ACL-02 conference on Empirical methods in natural
language processing, pp. 79–86.
Peterson, R., 2016. Trading on Sentiment: The Power of Minds Over Markets. John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd.
Ranco, G., Aleksovski, D., Caldarelli, G., Grcar, M., Mozetic, I., 2015. The effects of Twitter
sentiment on stock price returns. PLOS ONE 10, e0138441.
Ranco, G., Bordino, I., Bormetti, G., Caldarelli, G., Lillo, F., Treccani, M., 2016. Coupling news
sentiment with web browsing data improves prediction of intra-day price dynamics. PLOS ONE
11, e0146576.
Shumway, R.H., Stoffer, D.S., 1982. An approach to time series smoothing and forecasting using
the EM algorithm. Journal of Time Series Analysis 3, 253–264.
Smales, L.A., 2014. News sentiment in the gold futures market. Journal of Banking & Finance 49,
275 – 286.
37

Smales, L.A., 2015. Asymmetric volatility response to news sentiment in gold futures. Journal of
International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money 34, 161–172.
Sun, L., Najand, M., Shen, J., 2016. Stock return predictability and investor sentiment: A high-
frequency perspective. Journal of Banking & Finance 73, 147 – 164.
Tetlock, P.C., 2007. Giving content to investor sentiment: The role of media in the stock market.
The Journal of Finance 62, 1139–1168.
Thorsrud, L.A., 2018. Words are the new numbers: A newsy coincident index of the business cycle.
Journal of Business & Economic Statistics , 1–17.
Vohra, S., Teraiya, J., 2013. A comparative study of sentiment analysis techniques. Journal JIKRCE
2, 313–317.
Wu, L.S.Y., Pai, J.S., Hosking, J., 1996. An algorithm for estimating parameters of state-space
models. Statistics & Probability Letters 28, 99–106.
38

Supplementary Material
A Estimation procedure
The estimation of model (2.6) is performed using the Kalman filter (Kalman, 1960) and the
Expectation Maximization (EM) method in (Dempster et al., 1977) and (Shumway and Stoffer,
1982) which was proposed to deal with incomplete or latent data and intractable likelihood.
The EM algorithm is a two-step estimator. In the first step, we write the likelihood consider-
ing the latent process as observed. In the second step, we re-estimate the static parameters
maximizing the expectation obtained in the first step. This routine is repeated until some
convergence criterion is satisfied.
To cast (2.6) in a standard state-space representation, we use the same procedure of
˜ ˜ ˜ ˜
(Banbura and Modugno, 2014) and define the augmented states Λ, F, Φ and Q s.t.
˜ ˜
S = ΛF + ǫ , ǫ (0, R),
t t t t
∼ N
(A.1)
˜ ˜ ˜ ˜
F = ΦF + v , v 0, Q ,
t t−1 t t
∼ N
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where
Λ˜ RK×(q+K)
= Λ I (A.2)
(cid:20) K(cid:21) ∈
F
t
F˜   R(q+K)×1
= (A.3)
t
∈
Ψ
 t
 
I 0
q
Φ˜   R(q+K)×(q+K)
= (A.4)
∈
0 Φ
 
 
Q 0
long
Q˜   R(q+K)×(q+K)
= (A.5)
∈
0 Q
 short
 
39

The EM renders the approach feasible in high dimension. Indeed, while a direct numerical
maximization of the likelihood is computationally demanding, the EM algorithm, thanks
to the Kalman filtering and smoothing recursions, can be formulated in closed-form. See
Appendix B and C. In particular, it allows to disentangle the long-term sentiment F and the
t
˜
short-term sentiment Ψ . To derive the EM steps we consider the log-likelihood l S , F , θ
t t t
(cid:16) (cid:17)
˜ ˜ ˜
where θ denotes the set of static parameters Λ, Φ, Q and R. The EM proceeds in a sequence
of steps:
1. E-step: it evaluates the expectation of the log-likelihood using the estimated parame-
ters from the previous iteration θ (j):
˜ ˜ ˜ ˜
G Λ (j), Φ(j), Q (j), R (j) = E l S , F , θ (j) S , . . ., S .
t t 1 T
|
(cid:16) (cid:17) h (cid:16) (cid:17) i
The E-step strongly relies on the Kalman smoother. The details are explained in
Appendix B.
2. M-step: the parameters are estimated again maximizing the expected log-likelihood
with respect to θ:
˜ ˜ ˜
θ (j + 1) = argmaxG Λ(j) , Φ(j), Q (j), R (j) .
θ (cid:16) (cid:17)
The M-step is performed updating the static parameters. Further information on the
equations can be found in Appendix C.
We initialize the parameters θ (0) and repeat steps 1 and 2 until we reach the convergence
criterion
˜ ˜
l S , F , θ (j) l S , F , θ (j 1)
t t t t ǫ
| − − |
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) < . (A.6)
˜ ˜ 2
l S , F , θ (j) + l S , F , θ (j 1)
t t t t
| − |
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
We set ǫ = 10−3.
As observed in (Harvey, 1990), the dynamic factor model (A.1) is not identifiable. Indeed,
40

if we consider a non singular invertible matrix M, then the parameters θ = Λ, R, Q and
1
{ }
θ = ΛM−1, R, MQM′ are observationally equivalent, then starting from S we cannot
2 t
{ }
distinguish θ from θ . We solve this identification problem using the approach proposed by
1 2
(Harvey, 1990), imposing the following restrictions
I 0
q
˜  
Q =
0 Q
 short
 
λ 0 0 . . . 0
11
 
λ λ 0 . . . 0
 21 22  (A.7)
 
. . . . .
 . . . . . 
. . . . .
 
Λ =  
. . . .
 . . . . 
 . . . . 0 
 
 . . . . . 
. . . . .
 . . . . . 
 
 
 
λ λ λ . . . λ
 K1 K2 K3 Kq
 
where Λ is the K q sub-matrix in (A.2).
×
˜ ˜ ˜
The specifications of Λ, Φ, Q and R in (A.2), (A.4) and (A.5), together with the identi-
fication restrictions defined in (A.7), impose several constraints to the estimations. The EM
procedure allows us to impose restrictions on the parameters in a closed-form. According to
˜ ˜ ˜
(Wu et al., 1996) and (Bork, 2009), we get the constrained Φ, Λ, Q and R as:
vec (Φ˜ ) = vec (Φ˜ ) + A−1 Q˜ M(M(A−1 Q˜ )M′)−1(k Mvec (Φ)) (A.8)
r Φ
⊗ ⊗ −
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where A is defined in equation C.2, M is the f 2K(r + K) matrix, f is the number of
×
vec ˜
constraints, k is the f vector containing the constraints values such that M (Φ) = k .
Φ Φ
Equivalently, for the restricted Λ :
r
vec vec −1 −1 ′ −1 vec
(Λ ) = (Λ) + E R G(G(E R)G ) (k G (Λ)) (A.9)
r 1 1 λ
⊗ ⊗ −
(cid:0) (cid:1)
41

where E is defined in C.2, G is the s Kr matrix, s is the number of constraints, k is the
1 λ
×
vec
s vector containing the constraints values such that G (Λ) = k . The details for the eval-
λ
˜
uation of Q and R are reported in equation (C.5) and (C.6) and the restrictions, according
to (Wu et al., 1996), can be imposed elementwise.
The final estimation scheme reads as follows:
˜ ˜ ˜
1. Initialize Λ(0), Φ (0), Q (0) and R (0)
˜ ˜ ˜
2. Perform the E-step using the estimations Λ(j), Φ (j), Q (j), R (j) and the Kalman
smoother.
˜ ˜ ˜
3. Perform the M-step and evaluate the new estimators Λ (j + 1), Φ(j + 1), Q (j + 1) and
R (j + 1).
4. Use the unrestricted estimations and (A.8) and (A.9) to obtain the restricted ones.
5. Repeat 2, 3 and 4 above until the estimates and the log-likelihood reach convergence.
Finally, since the number of long-term sentiment q is considered as known, we select the
optimal q using the AIC and BIC indicators.
42

B Filter and Smoother recursions
In this section, we report Kalman Filter and Smoother recursions ancillary to the EM algo-
rithm. The derivation of the formulas which follow can be found in (Shumway and Stoffer,
1982).
Starting from system (A.1), we calculate recursively the Kalman Filter as:
˜ ˜ ˜ ˜
F = E F S , . . ., S = ΦF
t|t−1 t 1 t−1 t−1|t−1
|
h i
′
F˜ F˜ F˜ F˜ Φ˜ Φ˜′
P = E S , . . ., S = P + Q
t|t−1 t t|t−1 t t|t−1 1 t−1 t−1|t−1
(cid:20) − − | (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:16) (cid:17)
−1
Λ˜′ Λ˜ Λ˜′ (B.1)
K = P P + R
t t|t−1 t|t−1
(cid:16) (cid:17)
˜ ˜ ˜ ˜
F = F + K S ΛF
t|t t|t−1 t t t|t−1
−
(cid:16) (cid:17)
˜
P = P K ΛP
t|t t|t−1 t t|t−1
−
˜
where we take F = µ and P = Σ. Now, using backward recursions t = T, . . ., 1 we derive
0|0 0|0
the Smoother as
Φ˜′ −1
J = P P
t−1 t−1|t−1 t|t−1
(cid:0) (cid:1)
˜ ˜ ˜ ˜ ˜
F = F + J F ΦF
t−1|T t−1|t−1 t−1 t|T t−1|t−1
−
(cid:16) (cid:17) (B.2)
P = P + J P P J′
t−1|T t−1|t−1 t−1 t|T t|t−1 t−1
−
(cid:0) (cid:1)
′ ˜ ′
P = P J + J P ΦP J
t−1,t−2|T t−1|t−1 t−2 t−1 t,t−1|T t−1|t−1 t−2
−
(cid:16) (cid:17)
˜ ˜
where P = I K Λ ΦP .
T,T−1|T T T−1|T−1
−
(cid:16) (cid:17)
43

C Expectation Maximization
The log-likelihood of the model (A.1) is
T T
˜ ˜ ˜ ˜
l S , F , θ (j) =log f(F ) + log f(F S ) + log f(S F )
t t 0 t t−1 t t
| |
(cid:16) (cid:17) X X
t=1 t=1
1 1 ′
= log Σ F˜ a Σ−1 F˜ a
0 0
− 2 | | − 2 − −
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
T
T 1 ′
Q˜ F˜ Φ˜ F˜ Q˜−1 F˜ Φ˜ F˜
log
t t−1 t t−1
− 2 | | − 2 − −
X (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
t=1
T
T 1 ′
log R S Λ˜ F˜ R−1 S Λ˜ F˜
t t t t
− 2 | | − 2 − −
X(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
t=1
˜
where a and Σ are the parameters s.t. F (a, Σ).
0
∼ N
E-step
The objective function to maximize is, from (Shumway and Stoffer, 1982),
˜ ˜ ˜
G a, Σ, R, Q, Λ, Φ = E [log f S , . . ., S ] ,
m 1 T
|
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where E denotes the conditional expectation relative to a density containing the mth iterate
m
˜ ˜ ˜
values a(m), Σ(m), R(m), Q(m), Λ(m) and Φ(m).
Using now the Kalman smoother (B.2) we can derive
′ ′
˜ ˜ ˜ ˜ ˜ ˜ ˜ ˜ ˜ ˜
E S ΛF S ΛF S , . . .S = S ΛF S ΛF + ΛP Λ′
t t t t 1 T t t|T t t|T t|T
(cid:20) − − | (cid:21) − −
(cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:16) (cid:17)
′
F˜ Φ˜ F˜ F˜ Φ˜ F˜ F˜ F˜′ Φ˜ Φ˜′
E S , . . ., S =P + + P
t t−1 t t−1 1 T t|T t|T t|T t−1|T
(cid:20) − − | (cid:21)
(cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:16) (cid:17)
Φ˜ F˜ F˜′ Φ˜′ Φ˜′
+ P
t−1|T t−1|T t,t−1|T
−
F˜ F˜′ Φ˜′ Φ˜ Φ˜ F˜ F˜′
P ,
t|T t−1|T t,t−1|T t−1|T t|T
− − −
44

lead to
1 1 ′
˜ ˜ ˜ −1 ˜ ˜
G a, Σ, R, Q, Λ, Φ = log Σ tr Σ P + F a F a
0|T 0 0
− 2 | | − 2 { (cid:20) − − (cid:21)}
(cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:16) (cid:17)
T 1
log Q˜ tr Q˜−1 C BΦ˜′ Φ˜ B′ + Φ˜ AΦ˜′ (C.1)
− 2 | | − 2 { − − }
(cid:16) (cid:17)
T 1
log R tr R−1 E Λ˜ E′ E Λ˜′ + Λ˜ E Λ˜′ ,
3 2 2 1
− 2 | | − 2 { − − }
(cid:16) (cid:17)
where
T
F˜ F˜′
A = + P ,
t−1|T t−1|T t−1|T
X (cid:16) (cid:17)
t=1
T
F˜ F˜′
B = + P ,
t|T t−1|T t,t−1|T
X (cid:16) (cid:17)
t=1
T
F˜ F˜′
C = + P ,
t|T t|T t|T
X (cid:16) (cid:17)
t=1
(C.2)
T
F˜ F˜′
E = P + ,
1 t|T t|T t|T
X
t=1
T
F˜′
E = S ,
2 t t|T
X
t=1
T
E = S S′.
3 t t
X
t=1
M-step
The resulting update equations are
Λ(m + 1) = E E−1 (C.3)
2 1
Φ˜ (m + 1) = BA−1 (C.4)
1
Q˜ (m + 1) = C BΦ˜ (m + 1)′ Φ˜ (m + 1)B′ + Φ˜ (m + 1)AΦ˜ (m + 1)′ (C.5)
T − −
(cid:16) (cid:17)
1
R(m + 1) = E Λ˜ (m + 1)E′ E Λ˜ (m + 1)′ + Λ˜ (m + 1)E Λ˜ (m + 1)′ (C.6)
3 2 2 1
T − −
(cid:16) (cid:17)
˜
a(m + 1) = F (C.7)
0|T
45

Σ(m + 1) = P . (C.8)
0|T
˜
For simplicity, in our estimations we impose F = 0.
0
46

D List of stocks
Table 8 reports names and sectors of the 27 stocks considered in the empirical analysis.
Tickers Name Sector ticker Sector name
VZ Verizon COM Communication Services
CVX Chevron ENE Energy
AXP American Express Company FIN Financial
GS Goldman Sachs FIN Financial
JPM JPMorgan Chase FIN Financial
JNJ Johnson & Johnson HLC Health Care
MRK Merck HLC Health Care
PFE Pfizer HLC Health Care
UNH UnitedHealth HLC Health Care
BA Boeing IND Industrials
CAT Caterpillar IND Industrials
GE General Electric IND Industrials
MMM 3M Co IND Industrials
UTX United Technologies IND Industrials
XOM XOMA Corp MAT Basic Materials
KO Coca-Cola NCY Consumer Goods
PG Procter & Gamble NCY Consumer Goods
AAPL Apple TEC Technology
CSCO Cisco TEC Technology
IBM IBM TEC Technology
INTC Intel TEC Technology
MSFT Microsoft TEC Technology
DIS Disney YCY Consumer Cyclical
HD Home Depot YCY Consumer Cyclical
MCD McDonalds YCY Consumer Cyclical
NKE Nike YCY Consumer Cyclical
WMT Wal-Mart YCY Consumer Cyclical
Table 8: List of investigated stocks, their ticker, and the economic sector according to the
classification of Yahoo Finance.
47

E Signal-to-noise ratio and comparison with MLNSL
We compare how well the MLSS model fits the data with respect to the MLNSL model using
the likelihood ratio test. Since the MLNSL model is nested into the MLSS model, we use
the χ2 distribution to test the null hypothesis (the MLSS model does not fit the data better
than the MLNSL) against the alternative hypothesis (the MLSS model fits the data better
than the MLNSL). The null hypothesis is rejected with a p-value smaller than 0.01 for both
news and social sentiment.
In the last columns of Table 1 in the paper we report the signal-to-noise ratio for each
asset obtained using the MLSS model and the signal-to-noise ratio obtained using the MLNSL
model. The signal-to-noise ratio for the MLSS model, using the same notation of equation
(2.6), is evaluated as
Var (Λ(i, )v ) + Var (ui) q (Λ(i, j))2 + Q (i, i)
stn (i)MLSS = · t t = j=1 short (E.1)
Var (ǫi) P R(i, i)
t
while the signal to noise ratio for the MLNSL model, using the notation of equation (2.2),
is evaluated as
Var (vi) Q(i, i)
stn MLNSL t
(i) = = (E.2)
Var (ǫi) R(i, i)
t
When the MLSS model is estimated, the signal to noise ratio is on average around 0.8 for
the news sentiment, while when the MLNSL model is estimated, the signal to noise ratio
decreases to an average of 0.03.
Thus our proposed MLSS model has a signal-to-noise ratio approximately twenty times
larger than the MLNSL. Our result also points out that the noise in social media is generally
higher than the noise in newspapers.
48

F Quantile regression: Contemporaneous effects
In this appendix we perform the same tests of Section 5.1.1 in the paper with contempo-
raneous return and sentiment. In particular, we compute the quantile regression (5.2) with
h = 0, Table 9 shows the values of the R1(τ) measure for different values of τ. It is worth
R1(τ) measure
τ quantiles
MLSS LSS MLNSL LNSL Obs
0.01 16.2%∗∗∗ 6.1%∗∗ 1.4% 1.6% 0.6%
0.05 9.2%∗∗∗ 4.0%∗∗∗ 2.8%∗∗∗ 2.7%∗∗∗ 1.7%∗∗∗
0.10 7.1%∗∗∗ 4.3%∗∗∗ 3.5%∗∗∗ 3.2%∗∗∗ 2.5%∗∗∗
0.33 2.2%∗∗∗ 1.8%∗∗∗ 1.9%∗∗∗ 1.7%∗∗∗ 1.0%∗∗∗
0.50 1.1%∗∗∗ 1.1%∗∗∗ 1.2%∗∗∗ 1.0%∗∗∗ 0.7%∗∗∗
0.66 0.5%∗∗∗ 0.9%∗∗∗ 1.3%∗∗∗ 0.8%∗∗∗ 0.7%∗∗∗
0.90 1.2%∗∗∗ 1.7%∗∗∗ 1.5%∗∗∗ 0.8%∗∗∗ 0.8%∗∗∗
0.95 2.9%∗∗∗ 2.3%∗∗∗ 1.9%∗∗∗ 1.0%∗∗∗ 1.0%∗∗∗
0.99 10.2%∗∗∗ 4.6%∗∗ 0.9% 0.6% 1.5%
Table 9: The R1 measure across the value τ. We denote with ∗∗∗ the significance at 1%, ∗∗ the
significance at 5% and ∗ the significance at 10%
to notice that the quantile regressions are highly significant for every model, except for the
0.01 and 0.99 quantiles, where they are only significant for the MLSS and LSS models.
There are three important findings. The first one is that, as in the lagged relation, for any
model, the values of R1 are higher in the tails and lower close to the median. The results
are not symmetric around the median. The lower quantiles, which correspond to negative
returns, have higher R1 than the corresponding R1 in the higher quantiles. This suggests
that the sentiment series are powerful explanatory variables in bad times. This conclusion
is in accordance with the results in (Garcia, 2013), which shows that investors’ sensitivity
to news is most pronounced going through hard times. The second result is that the models
which exploit the multivariate structure (MLSS and MLNSL) produce higher R1 measures
than the corresponding models which apply the cross-sectional averaging procedure on the
sentiment series (LSS and LNSL models, respectively). This result confirms that the cross-
sectional dependence structure is helpful in extracting a sensible signal. The last result is
that the MLSS and LSS models, excluding few values around the median, have higher R1(τ)
49

p-values
τ quantiles
LST LLT
t t
0.01 0.005% 76.313%
0.05 0.000% 2.052%
0.10 0.000% 3.381%
0.33 0.000% 3.257%
0.50 0.000% 7.668%
0.66 1.487% 20.078%
0.90 0.189% 0.309%
0.95 0.007% 0.922%
0.99 0.006% 22.903%
Table 10: p-values for the statistics in equation (5.5) and equation (5.4).
values than other models. This suggests that disentangling the long-term and short-term
sentiment components is the most important step to capture the contemporaneous relation
with market returns. In particular, the MLSS model, which exploits both the separation in
two components and the multivariate structure, strongly outperforms the benchmark model,
which solely uses the observed noisy sentiment.
If we look at the contribution of the short and long-term sentiment separately using
equation (5.3), we again observe similar results with the one observed in Section 5.1.1 of
the paper. Table 10 reports the p-values of the statistics (5.5) and (5.4) and shows that the
short-term sentiment is highly significant at any level of τ, while the long-term sentiment
has lower p-values. In particular, the short-term sentiment, which captures rapidly changing
trends, is significant for extreme returns (τ = 0.01 or τ = 0.99) while the long-term sentiment
is not. This result suggests that extreme market swings can be explained by unexpected and
short-lasting news. Moreover, it further supports the importance of disentangling sentiment
components which are sensitive to different time scales.
These findings show very strong contemporaneous relation between sentiment and market
returns. We look at these results as a sanity check of our approach. Indeed, since we are
not claiming that sentiment causes returns or viceversa, then it is reasonable to expect a
significant contemporaneous relation at daily time scale. The sentiment explains returns and
this could be due to the fact that the news, from which sentiment is computed, report and
50

comment about the market performance. What is more promising is that the R1 measure
increases with the complexity of the model, and this is especially true for extreme market
events – where the observed sentiment is not significant. Then, we conclude that an essential
ingredient of the analysis is the combination of a multivariate model with the separation of
sentiment in two components, the stochastic long-run trend (long-term sentiment) common
to all assets and a fast changing and asset-specific trend (short-term sentiment).
51

G Portfolio allocation on February 2007-June 2017 with-
out trading costs
Table 11 reports the performances of the five sentiment strategies together with the buy-and-
hold portfolio without trading costs. We notice that the qualitative results do not change.
Given that the MLSS portfolio produces the higher number of trades, the performance gap
with respect to the other strategies increase in size in terms of returns, Sharpe and Sortino
ratios. Figure 6 shows the evolution of the sentiment-based portfolios without trading costs.
The MLSS portfolio, contrary to all the other portfolios, performs very well during the
financial crisis and strongly outperforms the other sentiment-based portfolios and the 1/n
portfolio. However, the gain reduces during the 2009 2017 bull market period. Nonetheless,
−
even if the absolute return reduces, the volatility is consistently lower during the whole period
and the Sharpe and Sortino ratios are respectively 40% and 49% higher in the MLSS portfolio
rather than the buy-and-hold portfolio.
Measures BH MLSS LSS MLNSL LNSL Obs
A. return (%) 8.972 9.393 7.650 9.091 8.308 7.33
A. volatility (%) 19.122 14.080 17.996 17.797 19.113 19.765
A. neg. volatility (%) 15.514 10.932 14.294 14.368 15.125 15.928
A. Sharpe ratio 0.469 0.667 0.425 0.511 0.435 0.371
A. Sortino ratio 0.578 0.859 0.535 0.633 0.549 0.46
MDD ($) 59377 54938 50182 49397 61921 61982
Table 11: Performances of the six strategies without trading cost for the period February 2007 -
June 2017. In bold, the best performance per row. BH is the buy-and-hold portfolio, while MLSS,
LSS, MLNSL, LSNSL, and Obs correspond to portfolios built from the corresponding model for
the sentiment time series.
52

Figure 6: Portfolio evolution of the sentiment based strategies built using equation (6.4) together
with the buy-and-hold equally weighted portfolio in blue.
H Robustness check: Portfolio allocation on July 2017
- December 2019
In this appendix, we use the parameter values estimated from the TRMI sentiment time
series over the February 2007 - June 2017 to filter the sentiment signal in the July 2017 -
December 2019 period. This procedure ensures that the filtered signals do not suffer from
any forward-looking bias.
Table 12 shows that the qualitative results do not change from the Section 6.2. The
MLSS model outperforms the buy-and-hold portfolio with a relative gain of 14% in both
Sharpe and Sortino ratio. Two main differences are visible from the February 2007 - June
2017 period. The LSS model slightly outperforms the buy-and-hold portfolio and it is the
second best performing model, while in the previous case the second best performing model
was the MLNSL. The Obs portfolio produces the same performance of the buy-and-hold
portfolio and the reason is that the selling signal from sObs is always negative. Then, the
number of transaction is equal to 1. In table 13, we see that the transaction costs do not
change the qualitative results and again, the MLSS strategy is the one which produces the
higher number of trades and, as a consequence, the higher transaction costs. As done in the
main text, the performance of the MLSS strategy from table 13 can be further improved by
53

|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|:---|
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |
|    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |    |

Measures BH MLSS LSS MLNSL LNSL Obs
A. return (%) 13.56 15.28 14.316 12.584 9.72 13.56
A. volatility (%) 14.477 14.311 14.257 14.672 15.053 14.477
A. neg. volatility (%) 10.673 10.552 10.489 10.841 11.521 10.673
A. Sharpe ratio 0.937 1.068 1.004 0.858 0.646 0.937
A. Sortino ratio 1.27 1.448 1.365 1.161 0.844 1.27
MDD ($) 23489 18871 19631 26639 31207 23489
Table 12: Performances of the six strategies without trading cost for the period July 2017
- December 2019. In bold, the best performance per row. BH is the buy-and-hold port-
folio, while MLSS, LSS, MLNSL, LSNSL, and Obs correspond to portfolios built from the
corresponding model for the sentiment time series.
Measures BH MLSS LSS MLNSL LNSL Obs
A. return (%) 13.566 14.571 13.907 12.518 9.492 13.566
A. volatility (%) 14.483 14.394 14.328 14.7 15.122 14.483
A. neg. volatility (%) 10.678 10.641 10.564 10.865 11.589 10.678
A. Sharpe ratio 0.937 1.012 0.971 0.852 0.628 0.937
A. Sortino ratio 1.27 1.369 1.317 1.152 0.819 1.27
MDD ($) 23489 19319 20330 26868 31898 23489
Number of trades 1 41 25 5 13 1
Transaction costs ($) 50 2460 1421 279 741 50
Table 13: Performances of the six strategies with trading cost for the period July 2017 - De-
cember 2019. In bold, the best performance per row. BH is the buy-and-hold portfolio, while
MLSS, LSS, MLNSL, LSNSL, and Obs correspond to portfolios built from the corresponding
model for the sentiment time series.
applying the penalization of the selling signal based on the Mc Fadden’s R2.
54

I Statistical significance of the sentiment portfolios
Here, we assess the significance of the trades produced by the strategy (6.3) for the different
sentiment filters. We design a Monte Carlo experiment where a trader follow a random
shuffled, mod
selling signal. The selling signal is given by s , which is nothing more than a shuffled
t
realization of smod. The number of random selling signals corresponds by construction to the
t
number of selling signals produced by smod, which is reported in table 6 of the paper. We
repeat the experiment 10, 000 times. The corresponding portfolios are then sorted according
to their Sharpe and Sortino ratios and the p-value of each strategy is computed by comparison
with the quantiles from the Monte Carlo experiment. Table 14 shows the results over the
period February 2007 - June 2017. The MLSS strategy significantly outperforms the random
strategy with a p-value smaller than 5%. All the other strategies are not statistically different
from a random strategy.
The p-values of the MLSS trading strategy are even lower when the R2-penalized trading
strategy (6.5) is implemented. Table 15 shows the p-values. When the number (100%) is
reported, all the 10, 000 random strategies perform worse than the MLSS α strategy. The
number of selling signals for the MLSS with α = 0.80 is too small and the result may be not
reliable.
55

Strategies Annual Sharpe ratio Annual Sortino ratio
MLSS 0.519(96.9%) 0.725(96.4%)
best 5% 0.485 0.69
best 10% 0.431 0.611
best 25% 0.349 0.491
median 0.26 0.364
LSS 0.385(36.7%) 0.542(37.4%)
best 5% 0.529 0.749
best 10% 0.502 0.709
best 25% 0.457 0.644
median 0.409 0.574
MLNSL 0.495(86.2%) 0.7(86.9%)
best 5% 0.523 0.739
best 10% 0.504 0.711
best 25% 0.474 0.667
median 0.443 0.622
LNSL 0.419(27.0%) 0.59(27.6%)
best 5% 0.524 0.741
best 10% 0.505 0.713
best 25% 0.475 0.669
median 0.446 0.627
Table 14: Performances of the sentiment strategies compared with the 95%, 90%, 75% and
50% quantiles from the shuffled strategy. Values in brackets are the percentages of randomly
generated portfolios which perform worse than the sentiment-based strategy for the period
February 2007 - June 2017.
56

Strategies Annual Sharpe ratio Annual Sortino ratio
MLSS(00) 0.519(96.9%) 0.725(96.4%)
best 5% 0.485 0.69
best 10% 0.431 0.611
best 25% 0.349 0.491
median 0.26 0.364
MLSS(20) 0.525(96.5%) 0.735(96.1%)
best 5% 0.502 0.712
best 10% 0.457 0.648
best 25% 0.383 0.539
median 0.306 0.428
MLSS(35) 0.68(99.9%) 0.967(99.8%)
best 5% 0.512 0.727
best 10% 0.473 0.67
best 25% 0.409 0.576
median 0.339 0.475
MLSS(50) 0.723(100.0%) 1.03(100.0%)
best 5% 0.531 0.752
best 10% 0.495 0.7
best 25% 0.436 0.615
median 0.373 0.523
MLSS(65) 0.757(100.0%) 1.09(100.0%)
best 5% 0.534 0.757
best 10% 0.504 0.711
best 25% 0.459 0.647
median 0.415 0.583
MLSS(80) 0.534(97.3%) 0.752(97.2%)
best 5% 0.519 0.733
best 10% 0.501 0.707
best 25% 0.477 0.671
median 0.45 0.634
Table 15: Performances of the R2 adjusted MLSS strategies for different values of α compared
with the 95%, 90%, 75% and 50% quantiles from the random strategy for the period February
2007 - June 2017. The sentiment strategies are referred to as MLSS(α 100). Values in
×
brackets are the percentages of randomly generated portfolios which perform worse than the
sentiment-based strategy.
57