Combining security scenarios development, capability gap identification and 
THOR Analysis in the MEDEA Networks of Practitioners.1 
George Kokkinis*, Genny Dimitrakopoulou*, Freideriki Makri* 
 
* KEMEA, Center for Security Studies 
 
Abstract- The THOR methodology is the most essential building block in a chain that aspires to 
influence the development of security solutions and produce meaningful recommendations to policy 
and decision makers. Initially, in order to identify operational capability gaps that security practitioners 
face, specific working scenarios are formulated and developed, exposing an array of possible threats 
and  responses.  Then,  analysing  these  scenarios  with  different  categories  and  ranks  of  security 
practitioners offers a well-rounded, comprehensive insight into the needs that should be fulfilled and 
the  operational  capabilities  to  be  developed  or  complemented.  This  detailed  detection  and 
documentation of capabilities serves as an impact analysis that offers the canvas that will be used to 
pinpoint and categorise individual attributes that touch upon the THOR methodology’s four dimensions: 
the  Technological,  the  Human,  the  Organisational,  and  the  Regulatory  dimension.  Based  on  the 
produced findings, a strategy shall be outlined so that practitioners are able to weigh-in on the cross-
over between gaps and urgencies and prioritise the fulfilment of their needs. A crucial element of the 
THOR methodology -and the purpose of this paper – is to demonstrate how each capability gap interacts 
with  the  THOR  dimensions,  revealing  the  interconnection  of  deficits.  Understanding  the  ad  hoc 
interplay of the four THOR dimensions is crucial to optimally grasp the challenges that need to be 
overcome. For instance, there are attributes that appear at first sight technological, nevertheless the sole 
adoption of a pertinent technological solution would not address core issues and deficits, if professional 
development (human-related dimension) or acquisition of expertise (organisational-related dimension), 
and/or  a  supportive  legal  framework  (regulatory  dimension)  are  not  in  place  beforehand.  THOR 
methodology assists practitioners to carefully identify their capability needs, prioritise them, by utilizing 
their operational experience. The application of a multiple-dimensional approach in a field as vast as 
security, considers expertise and experience by various security stakeholders  - their positions and 
specialties notwithstanding. This, in turn, generates ideas and solutions of practical value, aimed at 
addressing existing and emerging threats alike. 
Index Terms- THOR Methodology, Scenario development, End User requirements, Security projects, 
Capability gaps, Technology acceptance, Policy recommendations  
I.  INTRODUCTION TO MEDEA APPROACH 
The Mediterranean and Black Sea region has neighbouring countries that are experiencing security 
issues like the political uprisings in Egypt, Tunisia, and Libya, the wars in Syria and Ukraine to name 
but a few. The future security of the region depends upon a cooperative and collective ability to 
understand and shape conditions to counter traditional and emerging threats like the hybrid threats, 
economic and energy coercion, disruption of governance, disinformation campaigns, and paramilitary 
threats. As a result, the ongoing ‘migration crises and the increasing security ‘pressure’ experienced at 
the EU external borders, mostly in the Mediterranean and Black Sea regions is a result of existing 
migration  and  border  management  practices.  In  addition,  the  expansion  of  cross-border  crime, 
asymmetric  globalisation,  and  information  and  communications  technology  (ICT)  created  new 
opportunities for transnational organised crime groups (OCGs) to develop and expand, exploiting novel 
technological methods and regulatory loopholes, thus leaving Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs) one 
step behind. Aside the political and social economic factors, the region is the most vulnerable European 
region to earthquakes, flash floods and forest fires. The frequency, speed and magnitude of natural 
disaster risks are expected to be acerbated in the region due to climate change. 
 
 
1 DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.10003812 / Book chapter 
[1] 
 

Under this spectrum, innovative methodologies are being explored and employed so as to render LEAs 
better equipped to tackle challenges, unforeseen events, and emerging threats in a prompt and swift 
manner, often by anticipating and foreseeing risks, other than merely addressing them when they occur. 
The aim of this paper is to introduce the methodology used by the MEDEA network of Practitioners 
(NOP) as a method to better identify, analyse, and address the needs of security practitioners. It is argued 
that the implementation of this methodology can offer a better understanding of the multi-dimensional 
nature of the practitioners’ capability gaps that comes from the interplay of the four THOR dimensions. 
THOR’s four dimensions include Technical and Human issues inter-related with Organisational and 
Regulatory aspects. In more detail, the Technology dimension focuses on new technologies and studies 
their capacity to address current capability gaps. The Human dimension analyses the practitioners’ 
capabilities in regards of new skills and training requirements needed to suppress new and emerging 
threats. The Organisational dimensions studies the re-organisation needed to respond to emerging and 
future threats. Finally, the Regulatory dimension is related to the necessity of standardisation, the 
identification of gaps in legislative and policy framework in light of the new security era challenges, 
and the need for common policies.  
There are five main building blocks described in the MEDEA methodology (Figure 1). These are:  
 
Figure 1: MEDEA scenario development, Capability Gap formulation and recommendations process 
1.  A Scenario development block where security practitioners will first develop at organisational 
level, a set of security scenarios. Next at National and then at regional level, the practitioners 
will jointly evaluate the developed scenarios, select the most relevant ones and then with other 
security stakeholders from the region will elaborate the selected scenarios that will be later used 
to identify their needs for enhanced or new operational capabilities. 
2.  A  Security  Capability  Gap  identification  and  documentation  block,  where  security 
practitioners will describe the security capability gaps, they are experiencing. The capability 
gaps will be identified when practitioners compare their shortcomings and limitations they are 
experiencing against a desired “ideal” security state. In other words, the practitioners will 
describe what means they would like to have available to perform their operational duties. 
3.  The identified security capability gaps will be analysed in the Analysis building block. The 
security practitioners will analyse the needed capabilities using a four-dimensional analysis. 
The  practitioners  will  identify  the  Technology,  the  Human,  the  Organisational  and  the 
Regulatory (THOR) issues that should be fulfilled and addressed to minimise the operational 
impact of the said security gaps.  
4.  The fourth building block is promoting security market awareness. The security practitioners 
invite via an open call solution providers and security innovators to address the documented 
capability  gaps.  Based  on  the  documented  gaps  solutions  providers  and  pioneers  propose 
security solutions for addressing these gaps. A constructive dialogue between end users and 
solution providers is taking place in security Research, Development, and Industry (RDI) Days. 
Apart of Supply side presenting market ready solutions to end users, the security practitioners 
communicate their needs and proposed selected functionalities and features they would like to 
acquire.  
5.  The practitioners select several security products they would like to test, and experience in close 
to  real  life  operational  scenarios  in  selected  testbeds.  As  such  Proof  of  Concept  (POC) 
demonstrations are scheduled for practitioners and industry to jointly test, evaluate security 
[2] 
 

products. The practitioners provide feedback and influence the security solution roadmap of 
suppliers in RDI and POC instances. 
II.  SCENARIO DEVELOPMENT 
The security nature of scenarios is being utilised by many security institutions for different purposes. 
The US Defence Modelling and Simulation Office (DMSO) uses scenarios to establish an initial set of 
conditions and the timeline of significant events. For the needs of this analysis, the approach of [1] 
where ‘a representation of the state, and present actions, so as to permit the exploration of, or reasoning 
about, their future state and the events that lead to it’, is used.  As such, a set of scenarios is employed 
to assist security practitioners in describing current and emerging threats that are likely to occur. 
To initiate the application of the MEDEA methodology a set of scenarios are developed by practitioners 
using a specific template so that there is a uniform format of the incidents reported [2]. It is up to the 
practitioners to select the scenarios that they deem more relevant and useful. Under this light, they might 
consider scenarios developed across various security projects and further enhance or/and adapt them to 
match the peculiarities of the circumstances they encounter whilst performing their duties. From the set 
of developed scenarios, using the Delphi Method to approach expert consensus, a subset of scenarios is 
selected to be additionally scrutinised collectively in tailor-made workshops [3]. Hence, physical (or 
virtual because of COVID-19) interactions are then taking place between security experts, practitioners, 
and  other  stakeholders.  This  gives  ample  opportunity  for  the  practitioners to set out  their  current 
operational capabilities and gaps, explain how they respond to threats, and denote how they may become 
more effective and efficient. 
The scenarios are based on actual operational incidents stemming from current and emerging threats 
the practitioners believe they will encounter in the following years. Each scenario consists of certain 
sections. First, the security background is presented to introduce the countries and stakeholders involved, 
preliminary  information,  risks,  likelihood,  and  expected  impact.  The  following  sections  define 
parameters such as type of event, conditions, duration, and external factors (economic, social, and 
political stability). Also, it sets out the events that have built up to the point where the scenario takes 
place, as well as further elements, such as each practitioners’ organisations’ objectives and operational 
mandates. The scenario template is structured in a way to assist security practitioners to describe real-
life incidents, and define and elaborate the sequence of events, actions, and responses, while they also 
outline what impedes the practitioners’ reactions. 
III.  SCENARIO ANALYSIS AND CAPABILITY GAP FORMULATION 
Once a scenario is developed, it is studied and examined further by the partners with the aim of 
identifying and documenting capability gaps. A capability gap is defined as the difference between the 
current ability of security practitioners to prepare, prevent, respond, and recover from a security-
related challenge, and the future desirable condition. During the scenario analysis phase, security 
practitioners may provide clarifications, share their insights about additional challenges and needs, and 
elaborate on the operational capability gaps. The practitioners may further elicit the developed scenario 
and share their views about deployed or proposed solutions.  
Capability Gap Formulation 
MEDEA members express capability gaps using the following approach. 
<Title> Capability Gap Title </Title> 
<Section1> Background </Section1> 
<Section2> General description of operational capability gap </Section2> 
<Section3> Required capabilities </Section3> 
<Section4> Additional Considerations </Section4> 
The first section of the description is the Background. This section provides a description of what is 
required (from the practitioner’s point of view - who) and why. For example, the reduction of the degree 
[3] 
 

of a solution’s efficiency during certain conditions is a capability gap. If the desired capability would 
be available unconditionally to practitioners, this could improve the efficiency of their operations. A 
time to market is required (When) to indicate to solution providers the urgency to fulfil this capability 
gap. Lastly, this section should address the Where, that is the segment of security organisations that 
will benefit from a potential solution. Hence, the background provides an overview of the market need.  
The second section is the General description of an operational capability gap. This section provides 
additional explanation of what existing solutions fail to address (from the security practitioners’ point 
of view) and what additional or complementary capabilities the security practitioners would like to have 
instead. This section should clarify the need of security practitioners to acquire certain security solutions. 
Next,  the  section  Required  capabilities,  should  describe  the  minimum  set  of  requirements  and 
conditions that must be addressed, in order for practitioners to consider acquiring an offered solution. 
Additional  considerations  should  provide  additional  context  about  the  capability  gap  fulfilment 
requirements. It is quite possible that not all security requirements can be addressed in the preferred 
capability acquisition window. The practitioners might prefer incremental, continuous advancement of 
solutions instead of waiting for solutions that meet all the requirements at the same time. This section 
should include the requirements for accuracy, compatibility, form factor, maintenance, robustness, cost, 
and the technical characteristics of the desired solution. 
During the THOR workshops, it is critical to trigger the interest of the participants, as well as foster 
trust and communication. Audio and video material can be used to illustrate the scenario and introduce 
the capability gaps. Discussion of the gaps revolves around the THOR dimensions. The practitioners 
are encouraged to discuss a number of security issues and operational needs related to the scenario 
under analysis. As such, the development of questions, before the workshop, that lead the discussion is 
a good practice to not only boost interaction between the practitioners, but also to gather the information 
needed. Among others, the practitioners are asked to share their knowledge and experience regarding 
the scenarios’ capability gaps, or a particular aspect of them, and add new ones if applicable. This is 
illustrated in Figure 2. The main outcomes of the workshops are the documentation of the scenarios’ 
capability gaps, the identification of additional gaps, or relevant challenges and parameters that should 
be  taken  into  consideration  so  as  to  improve  existing  systems  and  procedures  and  develop  new 
functionalities. These insights, gathered during the workshops, are valuable for the next phase, which 
is the conduction of the THOR analysis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
     
          
   
                      
                
       
       
     
               
            
    
          
          
   
 
Figure 2: Practitioners’ capability gap identification and analysis process. 
IV.  APPLICATION OF THOR METHODOLOGY 
The development and evolution of THOR Methodology 
The THOR methodology, originally introduced by the FP7 project [4] and further elaborated in two 
H2020 projects [5] and [6], is considered a concrete framework to analyse the lacking operational 
[4] 
 

capabilities  that  are  necessary  to  prevent,  mitigate,  and  respond  to  a  plethora  of  security-related 
challenges. The CAMINO project introduced four dimensions which could be combined to efficiently 
enhance resilience. Several topics were identified and each one of these topics was assigned to one of 
the four (THOR) dimensions and further divided into objectives.  The work performed in INSPEC2T 
project revealed that a topic is composed of multiple objectives, but not all of them are related to one 
dimension [7]. That is, a topic can be attributed to more than one dimension. For example, a specific 
Technical solution, might require a legal amendment (Regulatory dimension), while most likely its 
introduction  might  necessitate  acquisitions  of  specific  skills  (Human  dimension).  The  work  in 
TRILLION focused on quantifying the objectives in terms of time horizons for short- term, mid-term, 
and long-term needs. In addition, each objective is prioritised over others [8]. As an example, a technical 
solution nowadays can be preferred over another (short-time frame), while in the mid- and long-term 
its  impact  might  be  less  severe,  therefore  other  solutions  might  be  needed.  Following  the  work 
performed in CAMINO, INSPEC2T, and TRILLION and their resulted findings, the enhancements in 
THOR methodology are combined in the [9]. The THOR methodology serves the objectives of MEDEA, 
that is to identify common capability challenges that practitioners’ need to address so as to suppress 
various illegal activities and actions related to the fight against organised crime and terrorism.  
Application of the THOR Methodology 
In the context of the MEDEA project, the THOR methodology has been further evolved to be applied 
to security projects and lead to recommendations to decision and policy makers. The application of the 
THOR methodology starts with the development of detailed operational scenarios to aid practitioners 
and associated experts define deficits and pinpoint the gaps that impede the optimal resolution of issues 
pertaining to security. Refer to Figure 3 (STEP A, STEP B, and STEP C). Then, the findings from the 
scenarios’ analysis leads to the explicit identification of operational capability gaps. The analysis of the 
said  gaps  (STEP  D)  leads  to  identification  of  specific  attributes  (STEP  E)  and  their  subsequent 
evaluation and prioritisation (STEP F). The outcomes of this process are forming recommendation to 
decision and policy makers (STEP G).  
 
Figure 3: Application of MEDEA methodology 
The findings of the THOR workshops, including a list of missing capabilities and additional information 
of each capability gap, are further processed following the four dimensions of the THOR analysis. The 
Technological, Human, Organisational, and Regulatory aspect of each capability gap is examined to 
find the main causes of the gap and possible solutions to overcome it. More specifically:  
[5] 
 

Regarding the Technology dimension, a variety of already developed solutions as well as developing 
ones are examined and assessed based on their adequacy to address the envisaged gap. The aim is to 
shortlist and prioritise the missing technical capabilities which are currently needed or desired in the 
mid and long-term by security practitioners. The challenges and/or possible solutions that fall under the 
Technology dimension may not be of technical nature. For example, sometimes the required technical 
solution exists but there are other factors (i.e., the cost) that block its broad use by practitioners. 
The Human dimension focuses on the required practitioners’ capabilities regarding new and advanced 
personal skills and trainings to suppress current and emerging security challenges. These capabilities 
may include trainings on new technologies, creation of motives for practitioners, and modifications on 
existing investigation methods. Eventual possible implications, which may follow the introduction of 
new capabilities are examined under this dimension as well.  
The Organisational dimension delves into the processes and procedures followed by the relevant 
practitioners’ organisations, that can be improved to address effectively emerging and future security 
threats. These may include the re-organisation of existing procedures and the development of new ones, 
the creation of collaborations, the development of a corporate culture, as well as proposals about the 
standardisation of procedures between different LEAs or across states. 
Lastly, the Regulatory dimension aims to identify obstacles either at the institutional, policy, or legal 
level that may impede the effective response to current and emerging security threats. A gap that is 
examined regularly  under this  dimension  is  the  need  for  adoption  of  aligned policies  and  unified 
regulations between distinct organisations and states, as mentioned above.  
Drawing on the above mentioned, the THOR analysis is applied in each capability gap identified in the 
respective  scenario.  This  implies  that  for  each  capability  gap  possible  Technical,  Human, 
Organisational, and Regulatory attributes are examined, applying also the information gathered during 
the THOR workshops. The term “attribute” refers here to the impact of each dimension to an envisaged 
capability gap. Based on the nature and the peculiarities of each gap, solutions to address the identified 
gap can be related to more than one attributes and dimensions. As such, a capability gap may have two 
technological  and  one  regulatory  attribute.  For  example,  the  performance  of  Electronic  Support 
Measures  (ESM)  sensors  might  need  to  become  more  stable  (technology  maturity)  and  might 
necessitate interworking with legacy command and control solutions (open /standardised interfaces).  
However, their usage for example might not be regulated in some EU MS despite the proven operational 
advantage they offer to practitioners.  
Security Scenario Workshops 
Following the scenario selection, physical interactions are carried out. A preferred audience for the 
workshop, apart from the MEDEA members and invited subject matter security experts, are members 
(practitioners) from other practitioners’ networks and / or members from other EU funded projects with 
profound interest in the workshop’s objectives. During the Capability Gaps Workshops, audio and video 
material is used to visualise the scenario and to trigger the interest and feedback of the participants. The 
practitioners are then invited to respond to a number of safety issues and challenges relevant to the 
envisaged scenario. Initially, the practitioners outline the existing capabilities that are able to respond 
to the challenges under analysis and then they are indicating (to the best of their knowledge and 
operational experience) the needed capabilities that will enable their organisations to become more 
effective. At the final workshop stage, the practitioners will confirm and rank the identified capability 
gaps. Hence, an outline is set out for acquiring and incorporating said capabilities in their respective 
organisations. 
V.  MEDEA USE CASE EXAMPLE: LAW ENFORCEMENT CHALLENGES IN THE DIGITAL AGE 
The MEDEA developed and sustained a TCP where its members focused on the “Fight Against Cross-
Border Crime and Terrorism” challenges. Using the scenario  development and the Capability gap  
analysis described in preceding sections, practitioners from LEAs confirm their need to use ‘automated 
tools to detect and subsequently remove online content’ [10], [11]. These gaps are attributed to the vast 
[6] 
 

amount of open-source data that needs to be investigated by LEA Open-Source Intelligence (OSINT) 
teams. Nowadays OSINT teams are using either commercial solutions - but often with limited/restricted 
number of licenses - or in-house developed open-source tools, like crawlers. Thus, a fully-fledged 
automated  Early  Warning System is  needed,  with adequate  number  of licenses  to  support  LEAs’ 
capacity in OSINT analysis. Following the identification of illegal content, its removal is a challenging 
and demanding process, and it is subject to different regulations and procedures based on where the 
illegal content is hosted. Furthermore, practitioners need ‘additional capabilities to intercept voice and 
data communications and decrypt / decipher them’ [12].  
The interception and decryption of encrypted communications is a very difficult and time-consuming 
task. The vast number of commercial messaging applications (WhatsApp [13], Signal [14]) and the 
uncomplicated development of customised applications for mobile devices like EncroChat [15], makes 
the use of customised communication products with end-to-end encryption favourable to perpetrators. 
At the same time, it becomes more difficult and more complicated for practitioners to decrypt OCG 
communications [16]. Hence, LEAs efforts to suppress OCG activities, apart from the use of more 
capabilities in Early Warning, Interception of Information, necessitates ‘better exploitation of existing 
databases and enforce open interfaces to data processing tools’ [17]. Police officers need access to a 
unified database that will include information from past cases and incidents.  
Records about known offenders and their modus operandi will assist practitioners to define a pool of 
suspects. The database should include OCG members’ criminal records, connections with other OCGs, 
countries and places where the offenders carry out their criminal activities, and other characteristics 
which will assist practitioners with their investigations. Apart from the single database, improved search 
functionalities using Machine Learning (ML), or Artificial Intelligence (AI) are needed for competent 
authorities to be able to process data more effectively. An example of the application of THOR analysis 
is summarised in Table 1 for the Capability Gap Finding (CGF) no. 1. 
Table 1: Application of THOR analysis - Example 
Capability  Technology  Human  Organisational  Regulatory 
Gap Finding  Attributes  Attributes  Attributes  Attributes 
[Id] 
Limited  [1] Early  [1] Need for  [1] Need to  [1] Legal definition 
access and  Warning System  Resources with  enhance cross- that will define 
use of  to detect online  linguistic  border  strictly illegal online 
automated  content.   expertise.   cooperation  radicalised or 
tools to       between LEAs.   terrorist content.  
detect illegal  [2] More  [2] Continuous  [2] Organise  [2] Reassess ethical 
content.   autodetection  professional  regular trainings  framework with 
[3.CGF.1]   tools with  development of  for their OSINT  respect the use of AI, 
affordable cost.   OSINT teams  teams.   ML. 
[3]  [3] Additional  [3] Encourage  [3] Amend legal 
Autodetection  personnel fluent  practitioners to  framework to assure 
capabilities in  in foreign  learn foreign  the protection of 
deep/dark web.  languages and  languages.   fundamental rights 
  dialects.    and endorse the 
  establishment of 
autodetection. 
[4] Data  [4] Encourage the  [4] Development   
analysis  involvement of  of IRUs at 
capabilities and  native speakers in  national level. 
translation tools.  OSINT units. 
 
The application of THOR analysis for the capability gap described in table 1 resulted in 4 Attributes 
found in the Technology, Human and Organisation dimensions, and 3 attributes in the Regulatory 
[7] 
 

| Capability     | Technology       | None               | None   | Human            | None               | None   | Organisational   | None              | None   | Regulatory              | None                   | None   |
| Gap Finding    | Attributes       |                    |        | Attributes       |                    |        | Attributes       |                   |        | Attributes              |                        |        |
| [Id]           |                  |                    |        |                  |                    |        |                  |                   |        |                         |                        |        |
|:---------------|:-----------------|:-------------------|:-------|:-----------------|:-------------------|:-------|:-----------------|:------------------|:-------|:------------------------|:-----------------------|:-------|
| Limited        | [1] Early        |                    |        | [1] Need for     |                    |        | [1] Need to      |                   |        | [1] Legal definition    |                        |        |
| access and     | Warning System   |                    |        | Resources with   |                    |        | enhance cross-   |                   |        | that will define        |                        |        |
| use of         | to detect online |                    |        | linguistic       |                    |        | border           |                   |        | strictly illegal online |                        |        |
| automated      | content.         |                    |        | expertise.       |                    |        | cooperation      |                   |        | radicalised or          |                        |        |
| tools to       |                  |                    |        |                  |                    |        | between LEAs.    |                   |        | terrorist content.      |                        |        |
| detect illegal |                  |                    |        |                  |                    |        |                  |                   |        |                         |                        |        |
| content.       |                  |                    |        |                  |                    |        |                  |                   |        |                         |                        |        |
| [3.CGF.1]      |                  |                    |        |                  |                    |        |                  |                   |        |                         |                        |        |
|                |                  | [2] More           |        |                  | [2] Continuous     |        |                  | [2] Organise      |        |                         | [2] Reassess ethical   |        |
|                |                  | autodetection      |        |                  | professional       |        |                  | regular trainings |        |                         | framework with         |        |
|                |                  | tools with         |        |                  | development of     |        |                  | for their OSINT   |        |                         | respect the use of AI, |        |
|                |                  | affordable cost.   |        |                  | OSINT teams        |        |                  | teams.            |        |                         | ML.                    |        |
|                | [3]              |                    |        | [3] Additional   |                    |        | [3] Encourage    |                   |        | [3] Amend legal         |                        |        |
|                | Autodetection    |                    |        | personnel fluent |                    |        | practitioners to |                   |        | framework to assure     |                        |        |
|                | capabilities in  |                    |        | in foreign       |                    |        | learn foreign    |                   |        | the protection of       |                        |        |
|                | deep/dark web.   |                    |        | languages and    |                    |        | languages.       |                   |        | fundamental rights      |                        |        |
|                |                  |                    |        | dialects.        |                    |        |                  |                   |        | and endorse the         |                        |        |
|                |                  |                    |        |                  |                    |        |                  |                   |        | establishment of        |                        |        |
|                |                  |                    |        |                  |                    |        |                  |                   |        | autodetection.          |                        |        |
|                |                  | [4] Data           |        |                  | [4] Encourage the  |        | [4] Development  |                   |        |                         |                        |        |
|                |                  |                    |        |                  |                    |        | of IRUs at       |                   |        |                         |                        |        |
|                |                  |                    |        |                  |                    |        | national level.  |                   |        |                         |                        |        |
|                |                  | analysis           |        |                  | involvement of     |        |                  |                   |        |                         |                        |        |
|                |                  | capabilities and   |        |                  | native speakers in |        |                  |                   |        |                         |                        |        |
|                |                  | translation tools. |        |                  | OSINT units.       |        |                  |                   |        |                         |                        |        |

| [4] Development   |
|:------------------|
| of IRUs at        |
| national level.   |

dimension. Similarly, the application of THOR analysis for the following 3 CGFs: “Difficulties for 
LEAs to remove online illegal content” [3.CGF.2], “Better exploitation of existing databases and 
enforce open interfaces to data processing tools” [3.CGF.11], and “LEAs require additional capabilities 
to intercept voice and data communication and decrypt / decipher them” [3.CGF.12], revealed the 
number of attributes associated in each THOR dimension, as shown in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4: Number of attributes in THOR dimensions for the case study. 
Technology related challenges 
Police Officers should have access to state-of-the-art (SOTA) solutions that will help them to detect 
illegal content online as early as feasible. These solutions should advance LEAs detection capabilities 
and offer them Early Warning (EW) advantages. For the implementation of innovative technological 
EW solutions to be effective, interagency collaboration and an engagement strategy that promotes co-
operation and data sharing are required [18]. Application of the THOR methodology highlighted the 
fact that technology should be used as an instrument to facilitate and promote cooperation between Law 
Enforcement  and  Judicial  authorities  across  different  EU  Member  States  (MS)  and  facilitate  the 
exchange of real time information without the risk of being compromised. Other than the advancements 
required for OSINT and SIGINT (for lawful interception and blockchain monitoring) solutions, equally 
important is the use of Technology to offer very accurate translation services to LEAs, since most of 
the illegal content is in languages most Police officers they cannot comprehend. This highlights the 
need to improve LEAs’ capabilities with advanced technology solutions across all phases of police 
investigation like interception and data collections, examination, and forensic analysis.   
The digitalisation of tools and the broader use of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) 
in the field of security could help LEAs in their fight against organised crime and terrorism, however 
the required innovative products should be integrated in the Police Standard Operating Procedures 
(SOPs) and interface existing solutions that are in service. Apart from the need for new technologies, 
another issue that emerged from THOR analysis is related to the fact that even when technological 
solutions exist, they are not commonly used by LEAs for different reasons, be it their cost or the fact 
that they are backwards compatible with existing systems, or do not fulfil all LEA needs, and as such, 
additional products are needed.  
Human related challenges 
New security solutions are mostly utilising AI which is a disruptive technology. AI does not only offer 
numerous benefits to LEAs, but it also introduces several concerns related to its use. Therefore, it is not 
only the nature of crime that evolves. There is the need for continuous trainings for LEAs to be able to 
keep up with the technological advancements and the complexity of the modus operandi of criminals 
since perpetrators are “early Technology adopters”. The introduction of SOTA solutions in police 
organisations has not only to do with technical aspects of getting these solutions up and running but it 
also necessitates the professional development of serving Police officers. Some complex solutions 
required knowledge of big data analysis, while solutions for profiling, and social media analysis impose 
the recruitment of scientific and specialised personnel in police forces.  
Furthermore, the application of THOR methodology stressed the need for additional and more frequent 
“traditional” police training which typically consists of simulations, joint training activities between 
LEAs from different countries, or trainings in cross-country investigative methods. Notably, police 
forces should recruit trained and skilled professionals based on the type of criminal activities they 
encounter on their operations. The advancements in Natural Language Processing (NLP) tools do not 
meet police analyst expectations. As such, OSINT teams should expand their capacity with skilled staff 
[8] 
 

that speak many languages (especially Arabic based languages and dialects). To efficiently fight against 
crime and terrorism, more skilled and trained officers are required to suppress the illegal transfer of 
money between organised crime groups either using cryptocurrencies or other traditional monetary 
exchange methods. 
Organisation-related challenges 
Even though the use of SOTA solutions to advance LEA EW capabilities is adequately explained, 
equally  important  for  LEAs  is  the  promotion  and  development  of  a  culture  of  preparedness  and 
prevention. Moreover, structural changes that will assist the inclusion of SOTA solutions in LEAs are 
required. These changes should endorse the addition of new capabilities (either through professional 
development or with the recruitment of new resources) and specialisation within LEAs, so that the 
organisation can modernise with AI applications their procedures. This might include the creation of 
departments that are dedicated in specific threats or specific tasks. In addition, at the organisational 
level, the need for multi-disciplinary and multi-agency / stakeholder cooperation was underlined. As 
such, the organisation of common events and trainings should establish and promote collaboration 
between  different  Police  organisations  from  EU  MS.  It  would  be  beneficial  for  LEAs  to  involve 
additional security stakeholders in the fight against organised crime and terrorism. The inclusion of 
additional security stakeholders (like online service providers, societal organisations, volunteers, etc.) 
is considered critical especially when it comes to the fight against online and new forms of crime.  
Regulatory related challenges 
Regarding the fourth THOR dimension that focuses on regulatory aspects, Police Officers identified the 
need  for  enforcing  regulations  and  directives  to  strength  inter-LEAs  collaborations  and  support 
information exchange. Aside from a cultural change required to promote intelligence exchange among 
LEAs, there is the need for new policy recommendations to facilitate the interconnections of existing 
LEAs databases and to promote the development and use of SOTA tools capable of performing complex 
queries in the interconnected databases. Police Officers who participated in MEDEA activities indicated 
that the legally binding level of these regulatory (and policy) frameworks should vary according to the 
stakeholders  involved.  For  example,  the  legal  framework  governing  the  process  of  intelligence 
exchange between LEAs should be more binding than the directives or recommendations that frame the 
cooperation between LEAs and other security stakeholders.  
The adoption of common definitions and the alignment of laws among EU MS is another need identified 
during the THOR analysis. Additionally, various practices are considered as criminal activities in 
certain countries, but not in others, like the use of the Hawala system [19] to transfer money.  Even at 
the national level, LEAs do not always follow the same laws and procedures. Thus, the adoption of a 
common approach, at least at a Regulatory level, could be very helpful in fighting organised crime and 
terrorism. Legal frameworks should also be developed, or amended, to accompany the advent of new 
technologies and technological advancements. For example, AI enhancements should be regulated by 
relevant laws. To that end, legal frameworks should be amended so as to not impede LEAs in their 
activities (nor facilitate criminals).  
To sum up, after defining specific capability gaps and identifying security challenges, THOR analysis 
is  employed  to  analyse  operational  issues  along  its  four  dimensions,  that  can  contribute  to  the 
formulation of strategies to address challenges, improve responses, and anticipate issues and anomalies 
in a better equipped manner. A critical component of the THOR methodology that should not be 
overlooked is that it reveals the interconnection of deficits and the interplay among the distinct four 
dimensions. Hence, a gap that may be attributed to the lack of technological solutions for its upkeep, 
might  -  in  reality  -  be  credited  to  the  pre-existing  lack  of  a  pertaining  regulatory  framework,  or 
faulty/inadequate training. This is proven to be central in grasping the fine - and at first glance hidden 
- aspects of the shortfalls’ root causes. 
Use Case Findings 
Members  of  OCGs  are  using  End-to-End  (E2E)  encrypted  communications  which  are  offered 
commercially and are free to use, e.g., messaging and telecommunication services like WhatsApp and 
[9] 
 

Signal. Decrypted communications are introducing additional challenges to security practitioners when 
it comes to Lawful Interception (LI). Advancements in quantum computing are required to support 
decryption and assist LEAs’ investigations, while monitoring modern communications in order to 
collect and analyse information in real time, is more challenging than ever. On the contrary, apart from 
the need for SOTA solutions, practitioners are also in need of mature technologies, like applications to 
access multiple databases to retrieve information or access past incidents databases which are not 
offered to front-line police officers. In this aspect, practitioners need access to unified databases across 
EU MS that maintain records of illegal content which is being removed. Advancements on AI and ML 
are not seen in Early Warning systems, thus offered solutions are not efficient to automatically detect 
online illegal content even in the surface web. In addition, there are not many E2E investigation 
solutions like automated tools to detect illegal content and translate it from non-well-spoken languages 
to a language the practitioners can analyse. Finally, offered solutions, apart from their high acquisition 
cost, do not always support interworking with deployed systems, or do not address the complete range 
of capability gaps, hence, more than one solution is often required to address most of modern security 
threats. 
Application  of  THOR  methodology  in  the  Human  dimension  revealed  that  the  lack  of  reliable 
translation tools triggers the need to recruit resources with linguistic expertise in OSINT teams, while 
there is the need for continuous professional development of information analysts. Overall, LEAs 
should  encourage  the  involvement  of  native  speakers  in  analysis  teams  to  assist  the  relevant 
investigations, profiling, risk assessment, etc. The introduction of tools is always related with the need 
of additional training to police officers and the establishment of training curricula that will support all 
phases of police investigations, follow the technology advancement and the continuous complexity of 
the modus operandi of criminals. Lastly, for the capability gaps resulted from the use of E2E encrypted 
communication  among  perpetrators,  LEAs  should  use  other  technology  solutions  to  intercept 
communications in open and closed spaces. Also, sharing best practises from successful interception 
and decryption cases might assist LEAs in dealing more effectively with LI.  
Results in the Organisational dimension exposed the need for enhancing cross-border cooperation 
between LEAs on information exchange and the need to organise joint trainings for their OSINT teams. 
Moreover, LEAs should offer incentives to encourage practitioners to study foreign languages so as to 
assist in the analysis of detected ‘suspicious’ online content, while at the national level, the Internet 
Referral Units (IRUs) should follow the example of the EU IRU. Furthermore, the cooperation between 
LEAs and online service providers should be improved to supress online illegal activities and advance 
interception techniques in communications when there is a court order besides the knowledge transfer 
between security practitioners and telecommunication experts. In this direction, LEAs should develop 
training  in  decryption  techniques  using  joint  workshops  between  LEAs  and  professionals  from 
telecommunication providers. Equally important, LEAs should update their SOPs to promote usage of 
existing information databases and foster a culture of interconnecting information repositories with 
advanced search engines so practitioners can benefit from simultaneous information queries across 
multiple databases. 
In  the  Regulatory  dimension,  the  main  findings  with  respect  to  the  increasing  use  of  encrypted 
communication by OCGs are the need for an amendment that will safeguard LEAs’ capabilities to 
lawfully intercept and decrypt these communications, and the need for changes in the current legislative 
framework to support the adoption of SOTA LI tools so LEAs can gain a competitive advantage to 
dismantle OCG operations. Similarly, there is a need for policy recommendations to facilitate the 
interconnections  of  existing  LEA  databases  and  to  support  the  development  of  tools  capable  of 
performing complex queries in interconnected databases. Moreover, regulatory directions are needed 
to support a framework to advance the existing cooperation between online platform providers and 
LEAs. The adoption of a new proposal for a regulation that will prevent the dissemination of harmful 
online  illegal  content  is  also  advised.  In  this  aspect,  a  common  and  inclusive  definition  of  what 
constitutes illegal online content, which should be very descriptive and detailed, and should be adopted 
by all EU MS, is recommended. A legislative improvement to assure the protection of fundamental 
rights and freedoms that will endorse the establishment of autodetection mechanism is required, while 
[10] 
 

the need to reassess the ethical issues with regards to the use of automated processing by LEAs through 
techniques in the field of ML and AI will ultimately also benefit societal security. 
VI.  CONCLUSION 
Summing up the core findings and lessons learned from the above-mentioned application of the THOR 
methodology in the MEDEA project shows that the interplay of the four THOR dimensions provides 
valuable inputs on the nature and the causes of the capability gaps of practitioners. These inputs can be 
used to adopt more efficient solutions. For example, a technological gap may be filled by reformulating 
the pertinent regulatory framework.   
 
This methodology has a track record of being useful in pinpointing broad problematic areas and specific 
tricky issues alike, by unravelling and promoting understanding of the deeper inter-connections between 
its four dimensions. Thus, the THOR approach can be adapted to any setting where many factors interact, 
requiring merely collaboration between experts and practitioners across disciplines, and of several 
expertise. 
The interwoven interplay of the method’s four dimensions has further showcased how important human 
and  organisational  aspects  are  to  support  the  technological  and  regulatory  aspects  (i.e.  the 
existence/formation of adequate structures, procedures, training curricula, guidelines, SOPs) as well as 
protocols (steps, roles, user requirements and responsibilities of key actors). It is further revealed how 
the Regulatory dimension can be a means to enhance technological solutions and not hinder innovation. 
Hence, unravelling the interconnections between the four THOR dimensions not only helps speed up 
processes to address operational capability gaps but also provides stakeholders with a clear policy 
roadmap.  
VII.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
MEDEA  project  has  received  funding  from  the  European  Union’s  Horizon  2020  research  and 
innovation programme under grant agreement No 787111. The support is gratefully acknowledged. The 
views expressed are purely those of the authors and may not in any circumstances be regarded as stating 
an official position of the European Commission. 
VIII.  REFERENCES 
 
[1]   I. R. e. a. Whitworth, “How do we know that a scenario is ‘appropriate',” in 11th International 
Command and Control Technology Symposium, , UK. ., Cambridge, 2006.  
[2]   G. Kokkinis, Identifying and Prioritizing Security Capabilities in the Mediterranean and Black 
Sea Regions Using THOR Analysis, Mediterranean Security Event, 2019.  
[3]   E. Rowe, G. Wright and J. Derbyshire, “Enhancing horizon scanning by utilizing pre-developed 
scenarios: Analysis of current practice and specification of a process improvement to aid the 
identification of important ‘weak signals’,” Technological Forecasting and Social Change, vol. 
125, pp. 224--235, 2017.  
[4]   CAMINO consortium, “Comprehensive Approach to cyber roadMap coordINation and 
develOpment,” 31 03 2016. [Online]. Available: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/607406. 
[Accessed 08 03 2019]. 
[5]   INSPEC2T consortium, “Inspiring CitizeNS Participation for Enhanced Community PoliCing 
AcTions,” 30 03 2018. [Online]. Available: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/653749. 
[Accessed 19 11 2019]. 
[11] 
 

[6]   TRILLION consortium, “TRusted, CItizen - LEA coILaboratIon over sOcial Networks,” 31 08 
2018. [Online]. Available: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/653256. [Accessed 19 11 2019]. 
[7]   G. Leventakis and G. Kokkinis, “Developing and Assessing Next Generation Community 
Policing Social Networks with THOR Methodology,” in Community-Oriented Policing and 
Technological Innovations, 2018.  
[8]   C. Patrikakis, A. Konstantas, D. Kogias and M. Chor, “TRILLION project approach on 
scenarios definition for citizen security services.,” in International Journal of Electronic 
Governance, 2017.  
[9]   MEDEA Consortium, “Mediterranean practitioners’ network capacity building for effective 
response to emerging security challenges,” 01 06 2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/787111. [Accessed 08 05 2022]. 
[10]  MEDEA, TCP3, 3CGF.1, “Limited access and use of automated tools to detect radicalisation 
content leading to violent extremism and terrorism,” 13 05 2020. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.medea-project.eu/2020/10/07/3-cgf-1. [Accessed 08 05 2022]. 
[11]  MEDEA, TCP3, 3.CGF.2, “Difficulties for LEAs to remove online radicalisation content 
leading to violent extremism and terrorism,” 13 05 2020. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.medea-project.eu/2021/05/26/3-cgf-2. [Accessed 08 05 2022]. 
[12]  MEDEA, TCP3, 3.CGF.12, “LEAs require additional capabilities to intercept voice and data 
communication and decrypt / decipher them,” 13 05 2020. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.medea-project.eu/2021/05/26/3-cgf-12. [Accessed 08 05 2022]. 
[13]  WhatsApp Inc. (Facebook, Inc.), WhatsApp.  
[14]  Signal Foundation, Signal Messenger LLC and contributors, Signal.  
[15]  CYFOR, “EncroChat: What is it and why did criminals use it?,” [Online]. Available: 
https://cyfor.co.uk/encrochat-what-is-it-and-why-did-criminals-use-it/. [Accessed 08 05 2022]. 
[16]  C. W. Bill Goodwin, “Police EncroChat cryptophone hacking implant did not work properly 
and frequently failed,” 11 03 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.computerweekly.com/news/252514476/Police-EncroChat-cryptophone-hacking-
implant-did-not-work-properly-and-frequently-failed. [Accessed 08 05 2022]. 
[17]  MEDEA, TCP3, 3.CGF.11, “Better exploitation of existing databases and enforce open 
interfaces to data processing tools,” 13 05 2020. [Online]. Available: https://www.medea-
project.eu/2021/05/26/3-cgf-11/. [Accessed 08 05 2022]. 
[18]  United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, “Five approaches to build 
functional Early Warning Systems,” 17 01 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://reliefweb.int/report/world/five-approaches-build-functional-early-warning-systems. 
[Accessed 08 05 2022]. 
[19]  M. El-Qorchi, “The Hawala System,” Finance and Development, vol. 39, no. 4, 2002.  
 
 
 
[12] 
 