1 of 8 
Introduction 
Life  science  data  is  evolving  to  be  ever  larger,  more  distributed,  and  more  natively  web-based. 
However, our collective handling of identifiers has lagged behind these advances. Diverse identifier 
issues (for instance “link rot” and “content drift” [1]) have hampered our ability to integrate data 
and derive new knowledge from it. Optimizing web-based identifiers is harder than it appears and no 
single scheme is perfect:  Identifiers are reused in different ways for different reasons, by different 
consumers. Moreover, digital entities (e.g., files), physical entities (e.g., biosamples), and descriptive 
entities (e.g., ‘mitosis’) have different requirements for identifiers. Nevertheless, there is substantial 
room for improvement throughout the life sciences and several other groups have been converging on 
identifier standards that are broadly applicable [2, 3, 4, 5]. 
 
Building on these efforts and drawing on our experience, we focus on the use case of large-scale data 
integration: we outline the identifier qualities and best practices that we feel are most important in this 
context.  Specifically,  we  propose  actions  that  providers  of  online  databases  (repositories, 
registries,  and  knowledgebases)  should  take  when  designing  new  identifiers  or  maintaining 
existing ones (Rules  1-9,  Box  1). In Rule  10, we conclude with guidance to data integrators and 
redistributors on how best to reference identifiers from these diverse sources. This article may also be 
useful  to  data  generators  and  end  users  as  it  offers  insight  into  the  issues  associated  with  data 
provision in a web environment. We call upon data providers to take a long-term view of their entities’ 
scope and lifecycle, and to consider existing identifier platforms and services [6].  
 
Throughout  this  document,  the  keywords  "must",  “should”,  "recommended",  etc  are  used  here 
interpreted as described by the W3C[7]. Terms that appear in fixed-width font are also defined in 
the supplemental glossary (Table S2). 
 
Rule 1.  Use established identifiers 
Rule 2.  Design identifiers for use by others 
Rule 3.  Help local identifiers travel well: document Prefix and Namespace 
Rule 4.  Opt for simple durable web resolution  
Rule 5.  Avoid embedding meaning 
Rule 6.  Make URIs clear and findable 
Rule 7.  Implement a version management policy 
Rule 8.  Do not re-assign or delete identifiers 
Rule 9.  Document the identifiers you issue and use 
Rule 10. Reference responsibly 
Box 1. A summary of the 10 simple rules 
Rule 1: Use established identifiers 
If you manage an online database (repository, registry, or knowledgebase), you are likely to 
have new entities to identify. You might also issue alternate identifiers for external entities, for example 
to reduce risks posed by dependency on an outside source or to identify meaningful differences in an 
entity, its state, or its representation.  
 
If you must create your own alternate identifiers, you must document the relationship between the 
existing and alternate identifiers using established properties such as ro:derives_from, owl:sameAs, 
or skos:broader.  If  the  motivation  to  create  a  new  identifier  is  based  upon  the  need  to  provide 
factual corrections of content, it is best to work with the database-of-origin to fix the source record 
rather than create a new one. Wherever the 1:1 relationship of identifier:entity breaks down, costly 
mapping  problems  are  created.  Wherever  possible,  reference  well-established  identifiers  (even 
problematic ones; see Rule 10) rather than creating new ones.   
 

2 of 8 
Rule 2: Design identifiers for diverse uses by others 
Pre-existing identifiers should be referenced without modifications (see Rule 10). However, when new 
local identifiers are necessary, there are some design decisions that can facilitate their use in diverse 
contexts (spreadsheets, other databases, web applications, publications, etc.).  
We use the term Local Resource Identifier[8] (LRI, Box 2) to mean a publicly available identifier 
that is unique within a single dataset. Local Resource Identifiers: 
•  Must comprise only printable ASCII characters without whitespace. This guards against corruption 
and mistranscription in many contexts. 
•  Should  contain  both  letters  and  numbers.  This  avoids  misinterpretation  as  numeric  data  (e.g. 
truncation of leading zeros in spreadsheets). 
•  Should  avoid  problem  patterns;  this  avoids  misinterpretation  whether  as  dates,  exponents  in 
spreadsheets [9], or unintended words. 
•  Should adhere to a fixed, documented case convention, preferably one that is case insensitive; 
this avoids accidental collisions. 
•  Must  adhere  to  a  formal  pattern  (regular  expression);  this  facilitates  but  does  not  guarantee 
validation and retrieval from scientific text. Consider a fixed length of 8-16 characters (according to 
the anticipated number of required LRIs). A pattern may be extended if all available identifiers are 
issued,  but  existing  identifiers  must  not  be  changed.  To  minimize  global  LRI  collisions,  it  is 
considerate to tightly specify your pattern (e.g. using two or more fixed letters at the start).  
•  Should ideally not contain ‘.’ except to denote version where appropriate (see Rule 7) 
 
Two  small  considerations  also  make  LRIs  well  suited  for  others  to  use  in  user-friendly  compact 
notation and semantic web. We therefore recommend that LRIs: 
•  Should not contain ‘:’, a reserved character for CURIE parsing (Box 2) 
•  If additional delimiters (other than ‘:’ and ‘.’) are needed, prefer ‘-’. This guards against certain 
CURIE parsers splitting inappropriately. 
Rule  3:  Help  local  identifiers  travel  well  by  documenting 
Prefix and Namespace 
Data does not live in silos: it is reused, broken into parts and integrated with other data, most notably 
in database external references (aka “XRefs”), in the Semantic Web, and in publications (articles and 
research datasets). The Local Resource Identifier (Box 2) alone is insufficient for these tasks because 
it  is  only  guaranteed  to  be  locally  unique.  For  instance,  the  LRI  “9606”  corresponds  to  numerous 
entities whose local accessions are based on simple digits, including: a Pubmed article, a CGNC gene, 
a PubChem chemical, as well as an NCBI taxon, a BOLD taxon, and a GRIN taxon.  
 
Despite  its  vulnerabilities,  the  location-based  identifier  scheme  (URI, Box  2)  is  the  best  available 
identifier form for machine-driven global data integration because it is a) widely adopted and b) its 
uniqueness  is  ensured  by  a  single  well-established  name-granting  process  (DNS).  Juty  et  al.  [10] 
summarise why name-based global identifier schemes (e.g. URNs) have had poor uptake by comparison.  
         
The length of URIs (Box 2) can make them unwieldy for tasks involving human readability, even within 
structured  machine-parsable  documents[11].  Compact  URIs  (CURIEs[12],  Box  1)  are  a  well 
established  convention  in  such  contexts  (e.g.  JSON-LD  and  RDFa)  as  they  enable  URIs  to  be 
understood  and  conveniently  accessed.  CURIEs  complement  URIs,  rather  than  replace  them. 
Therefore  document  the  prefix  which  others  may  use  to  abbreviate  your  identifiers  for  human 
readability, wherever needed. If you are a database provider, it is in your best interests to document a) 
the prefix (Box 2) that you would like others to use and b) its binding to a resolving namespace 
(Box 2). Your chosen prefix should be unique, at least among datasets that are likely to be used in the 
same context. To facilitate this, we strongly recommend that you register your prefix and resolving 
namespace; Table S3 contains a list of registries that may be suitable depending on the kind of data.  
 
 

3 of 8 
Box 2. Local and Global Identifier Terminology 
An identifier is a sequence of characters that identifies an entity.  
• Local Resource Identifier (LRI) is an identifier that is unique within the scope of a single database.  
o  Databases and library systems often refer to the LRI as an ‘Accession Number’.  
o  LRI formats vary by provider and may have subparts; however subparts are non-uniform and therefore 
not described here. For example, a LRI may be opaque (e.g. A0A022YWF9) or recognizable (e.g. ZDB-
GENE-980526-388) 
• Global identifier is an identifier that is guaranteed to be globally unique 
o  Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) is an identifier that is uniform; it is an ASCII string that uniquely 
identifies a resource. In this paper, by URI we mean only those URIs of type HTTP, HTTPS, FTP, etc. 
that actually resolve to (provide or redirect to) a webpage containing information about the identified 
entity. An example of a URI is http://zfin.org/ZDB-GENE-980526-388.  
o  When referring to compact URIs (CURIES), we mean an identifier comprised of <Prefix>:<LRI> 
wherein prefix is deterministically expandable to a resolving namespace (see below) which alone is 
the basis for the CURIE’s global uniqueness. An example of a CURIE is ZFIN:ZDB-GENE-980526-388 
• A resolving namespace is a sequence of characters which, when prepended to the LRI, yields the URI. 
In the ZFIN example above, the prefix is ZFIN and the resolving namespace is http://zfin.org/ 
See also Fig 1 and glossary (Table S2) for additional terms and concepts. 
 
Table 1. Desirable characteristics for database identifiers in the life sciences 
Characteristics  Definition  Rationale/impact on data integration 
Unambiguous  One LRI MUST be associated to no more than  Avoids collisions that result in integrating 
one entity locally. One URI MUST be associated  on the wrong entity 
to no more than one entity globally 
Unique  One entity SHOULD be identified by no more  Eliminates costly mapping problems and 
than one LRI and no more than one URI   avoids false negatives if identifier 
equivalence cannot be determined 
Stable (identifier)  The identifier MUST stay the same over time[a] Avoids link rot 
Stable (entity)   Identifier MUST NOT be reassigned to an  Avoids integrating on the wrong entity 
altogether different entity, though the entity may 
evolve provided a change history is documented 
Version-  If the entity’s definition or essential metadata  Avoids integrating on the wrong entity state 
documented  changes, (Rule 7) the identifier MUST be 
versioned and/or change history documented  
Persistent  The identifier MUST NOT be deleted  Avoids link rot 
Web-resolvable  The URI MUST be resolvable to a web address  Avoids the unnecessary proliferation of 
where the data or information about the entry can resolvable identifiers issued by third parties 
be accessed  (for entities that are not resolvable or 
identified in their native context) 
Convertible  The LRI and its URI counterpart MUST be inter- Avoids the need for special handling of 
convertible by prepending resolving namespace edge cases when integrating data at scale 
Defined  The identifier MUST each adhere to a formal Facilitates validation and extraction from 
pattern (e.g. regular expression)   text 
Web-friendly  The LRI MUST be of a format that does not need Avoids potential points of failure due to 
special handling when used in URLs and common malformed URL, XML, etc. 
exchange formats (e.g. XML) 
Free to assign  The identifier SHOULD be assigned at no  Encourages data providers to deposit data 
cost to individuals depositing data in a repository 
Open access and  The identifier SHOULD be able to be  Enables integration on the basis of 
use  transparently referenced and actioned (e.g. in a  scientific merit, rather than on the 
public index or search) anywhere by anyone and  restrictions of the license 
for any reason. Restrictions on associated data 
may apply but are not recommended. 
Documented  The identifier scheme MUST be documented  Encourages consistent use of existing 
identifiers. Decreases identifier proliferation. 
a Berners-Lee T. Cool URIs don’t change. 1998. [Cited 2015 May 15]. [Internet]. Available: http://www.w3.org/Provider/Style/URI 

| Characteristics     | Definition                                          | Rationale/impact on data integration             |
|:--------------------|:----------------------------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|
| Unambiguous         | One LRI MUST be associated to no more than          | Avoids collisions that result in integrating     |
|                     | one entity locally. One URI MUST be associated      | on the wrong entity                              |
|                     | to no more than one entity globally                 |                                                  |
| Unique              | One entity SHOULD be identified by no more          | Eliminates costly mapping problems and           |
|                     | than one LRI and no more than one URI               | avoids false negatives if identifier             |
|                     |                                                     | equivalence cannot be determined                 |
| Stable (identifier) | The identifier MUST stay the same over time[a]      | Avoids link rot                                  |
| Stable (entity)     | Identifier MUST NOT be reassigned to an             | Avoids integrating on the wrong entity           |
|                     | altogether different entity, though the entity may  |                                                  |
|                     | evolve provided a change history is documented      |                                                  |
| Version-            | If the entity’s definition or essential metadata    | Avoids integrating on the wrong entity state     |
| documented          | changes, (Rule 7) the identifier MUST be            |                                                  |
|                     | versioned and/or change history documented          |                                                  |
| Persistent          | The identifier MUST NOT be deleted                  | Avoids link rot                                  |
| Web-resolvable      | The URI MUST be resolvable to a web address         | Avoids the unnecessary proliferation of          |
|                     | where the data or information about the entry can   | resolvable identifiers issued by third parties   |
|                     | be accessed                                         | (for entities that are not resolvable or         |
|                     |                                                     | identified in their native context)              |
| Convertible         | The LRI and its URI counterpart MUST be inter-      | Avoids the need for special handling of          |
|                     | convertible by prepending resolving namespace       | edge cases when integrating data at scale        |
| Defined             | The identifier MUST each adhere to a formal         | Facilitates validation and extraction from       |
|                     | pattern (e.g. regular expression)                   | text                                             |
| Web-friendly        | The LRI MUST be of a format that does not need      | Avoids potential points of failure due to        |
|                     | special handling when used in URLs and common       | malformed URL, XML, etc.                         |
|                     | exchange formats (e.g. XML)                         |                                                  |
| Free to assign      | The identifier SHOULD be assigned at no             | Encourages data providers to deposit data        |
|                     | cost to individuals depositing data in a repository |                                                  |
| Open access and     | The identifier SHOULD be able to be                 | Enables integration on the basis of              |
| use                 | transparently referenced and actioned (e.g. in a    | scientific merit, rather than on the             |
|                     | public index or search) anywhere by anyone and      | restrictions of the license                      |
|                     | for any reason. Restrictions on associated data     |                                                  |
|                     | may apply but are not recommended.                  |                                                  |
| Documented          | The identifier scheme MUST be documented            | Encourages consistent use of existing            |
|                     |                                                     | identifiers. Decreases identifier proliferation. |

4 of 8 
Rule 4: Opt for simple, durable web resolution 
If you are a database provider, you must implement a resolving namespace (Fig. 1 panel B) for 
local  identifiers  to  be  “resolvable”  to  a  web  page.  Use  best  practices  to  implement  content 
negotiation for different encodings of your data [2], and provide direct access to data, metadata, 
and persistence statements [13]. If you choose to outsource to a resolver service, use an approach 
that is JDDCP approved [2] (e.g. DataCite, CrossRef, Identifiers.org, Handle.net, PURL, EPIC, ARK) 
and be mindful of your constraints regarding cost, metadata ownership, turnaround time, etc. (See 
Text S5 for a more comprehensive list of considerations.) If you have the resources to support your 
own  persistent  URIs,  design  these  to  be  simple:  Omit  anything  that  is  likely  to  change  or  lapse, 
including administrative details (e.g. grant name) or implementation details such as file extensions 
(‘resource.html’), query strings (‘param=value’), and technology choices (‘.php’). The compact URI 
approach can work with any resolver(s): see for instance examples 4 and 5 in Figure 1. By choosing a 
single namespace per database, you make it possible for others to resolve your identifiers simply (Fig. 
1  panel  A). If multiple resolvers are used, each must have a corresponding prefix (e.g.  KEGG-path: 
http://www.kegg.jp/dbget-bin/www_bget?path:  vs  KEGG-ko:  http://www.kegg.jp/dbget-bin/www_bget?ko:)  Occasionally, 
the resolving namespace is the same as the homepage (e.g. http://zfin.org/ in Fig. 1). In all cases, 
the resolving namespace must be exactly as it appears in the URI: it must include the protocol (e.g. 
http://) and, if applicable, trailing slash or other delimiters. 
 
Fig. 1. Examples of provisioning resolvable URIs:  
Compact URIs (CURIEs) (Panel A), URIs (Panel B) and Access URLs (Panel C) with in house examples from 
(ZFIN, UniProt, and ENSEMBL and 3rd party resolver examples using identifiers.org and DOI. In each case, the 
URI can be algorithmically derived from the CURIE, and the LRI itself is included (unmodified) within the URI. 
 
 
Rule 5: Avoid embedding meaning 
The  structure  and  scope  of  collections  evolve,  as  does  scientific  understanding;  minimizing  the 
meaning embedded in identifiers makes them less vulnerable to obsoletion. In human genetics many 
genes were initially identified based on disease association. Later the identification, nomenclature, and 
function of genes were separated into different activities. It is still possible to embed precision within 
an identifier: for instance, an InChI string both identifies a chemical entity and defines its structure. 
Hence, meaning can be embedded where it is indisputable, unchangeable and/or useful to the data 
consumer (e.g. computer-processable). These rules of thumb apply especially to LRIs but also to the 
path of the URIs (see Rule 4).  
 
When  assigning  identifiers,  define  what  kind  of  entity  is  being  identified.  This  information  must  be 
provided as an available description and encoded where possible, using metadata landing pages [2][13]. 

5 of 8 
Rule 6: Make URIs clear and findable 
Make URIs obvious to users, especially where these differ from access URLs or application pages. 
For  instance,  at  the  record-level,  advertise  the  “permanent  link”  together  with  a  statement  about 
persistence. E.g. “The permanent link to this page, which will not change with the next release of Ensembl is: 
http://Jul2015.archive.ensembl.org/Mus_musculus/Gene/Summary?g=ENSMUSG00000033577;r=9:80165031-80311729;redirect=no 
We aim to maintain all archives for at least two years; some key releases may be maintained for longer” 
 
For archived records that are out of date, make this clear to the user and provide a link to the updated 
version  (see  http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P12345.1,  for  instance).  Although  it  is  good  practice  for 
each database website to include general citation guidance for users, it is ideal to provide a “cite this” 
button at the level of each record. 
Rule 7: Implement a version-management policy 
Changes  in  data resources  impact  how they  can  be referenced  and  used.  If  you  issue  identifiers, 
document the change history for the resource (see also Rule 8), or version the identifier itself, or do 
both and document these.  
 
Explicit versioning is recommended if prevailing use of an unversioned identifier results in “breaking 
changes” (e.g., a change in the hypothesized cause of a disease). However, if new information about 
the entity emerges slowly and the changes are “non-breaking”, it is reasonable to instead maintain a 
machine-actionable change history wherein the changes are also categorized. Versioning and change 
history work well together, especially when multiple types of changes overlap. Even when previous 
records are removed, the URI should continue to resolve, but to a “tombstone” page (Rule 8).  
 
A summary of versioning recommendations follows in Tables 2a and 2b below. See Kratz et al. [15] 
for a more in-depth discussion of change management considerations. If you version identifiers at the 
level of the individual record, you must version in the LRI after the dot per UniProt in Table 2a; this 
provides continuity in your site and also enables a single CURIE prefix to be used with any version: 
UniProt:P12345.3 → http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P12345.3. 
 
Table 2a. Recommendation for record-level versioning with URIs 
Recommendation  Example  
(for clarity, LRI only is shown) 
Version information should follow after a dot  P12345.3 
Base resource must resolve (302 redirect) to most recent version  P12345 
Base resource should be deterministically convertible from version  P12345.1 to P12345 
Older versions must resolve  P12345.1 
Illegal or invalid version must produce an informative error message   P12345.302 
Link from older version to current version must be provided  P12345.3 
A list of all previous versions should be available   P12345 (see ‘history’ tab in user interface) 
Two versions (or dates) should be comparable   http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P12345?version=*  
 
Table 2b. Recommendation for database-release versioning with URIs 
Recommendation  Versioning may be done in the namespace (and ideally prefix) 
URI example  http://Jul2015.archive.ensembl.org/Mus_musculus/Gene/Summary?g=ENSMUSG00000033577 
CURIE example  ENSEMBL-2015-07-MUSG:ENSMUSG00000033577 
 
Rule 8: Do not reassign or delete identifiers 
Identifiers generated and publicly advertised must never be reassigned to a different record or deleted. 
If you issue identifiers, consider their full lifecycle: there is a fundamental difference between identifiers 
which point to experimental datasets (GenBank/ENA/DDBJ, PRIDE, etc.) and identifiers which point to 
a  current  understanding  of  a  biological  concept  (Ensembl  Gene,  UniProt  record,  etc.).  While 
experimental  records  are  less  likely  to change,  concept  descriptions may  evolve rapidly;  even  the 

| Recommendation                                                       | Example                                         |
|                                                                      | (for clarity, LRI only is shown)                |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
| Version information should follow after a dot                        | P12345.3                                        |
| Base resource must resolve (302 redirect) to most recent version     | P12345                                          |
| Base resource should be deterministically convertible from version   | P12345.1 to P12345                              |
| Older versions must resolve                                          | P12345.1                                        |
| Illegal or invalid version must produce an informative error message | P12345.302                                      |
| Link from older version to current version must be provided          | P12345.3                                        |
| A list of all previous versions should be available                  | P12345 (see ‘history’ tab in user interface)    |
| Two versions (or dates) should be comparable                         | http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P12345?version=* |

| Recommendation   | Versioning may be done in the namespace (and ideally prefix)                      |
|:-----------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| URI example      | http://Jul2015.archive.ensembl.org/Mus_musculus/Gene/Summary?g=ENSMUSG00000033577 |
| CURIE example    | ENSEMBL-2015-07-MUSG:ENSMUSG00000033577                                           |

6 of 8 
nature and number of the relevant metadata fields change over time. Moreover, the very notion of 
identity is often strongly impacted by relationships (e.g., between concepts or processes).  
 
Extensive changes cannot be captured with numerical suffixing alone. For instance, taxonomists may 
split or merge species, pathologists may split or merge diseases, or hypothesized entities may be 
proven not to exist (e.g. vaccine-induced autism). Global initiatives (Text S1) are actively exploring 
identifier strategies for such use cases. In the meantime, consider Table 3 recommendations. 
 
Table 3. Recommendations for identifier lifecycle management 
Recommended handling  Example 
Obsoletion: If an entry has been removed or deprecated, the original  Single obsoleted identifier: 
identifier must still resolve to a ‘tombstone page’. Reasons for  http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/A0AV18  
obsolescence should be indicated. If the obsoleted ID is replaced by   
another ID, the replacement must be present and also described as   
automatic or suggested, preferably using the ontology properties   
iao:replaced_by and obo:consider, respectively.    
   
The obsoleted ID must never be reassigned to another entity. A list of  List of obsoleted identifiers: 
obsoleted IDs should be maintained.  uniprot.org/help/deleted_accessions 
Merging: When two or more identifiers are merged, a new recipient  UniProt entries Q57339 and O08022 
identifier should be designated as the primary (citable) one and should  have been merged into Q00626. 
contain information about the legacy identifiers it encompasses. Any  Q57339 and O08022 are redirected 
legacy identifiers should continue to resolve via redirection to the primary  to Q00626. 
identifier.  
Splitting: If an identifier is split (demerged) into two or more new ones,  UniProt entry P29358 has been split 
new identifiers should be assigned to all the new entries. The legacy  into P68250 and P68251. P29358 
identifier must be obsoleted, must resolve, and should provide a warning  displays a warning and links to the 
and pointers to the new ones as per above.  demerged entries: 
http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P29358  
Rule 9: Document the identifiers you issue and use 
The  global-scale  identification  cycle  is  a  shared  responsibility  and  provider/consumer  roles  often 
overlap in the context of data integration. Whether you issue your own identifiers or just reference 
those of others, you must document your identifier policies. Supplemental Table S6 provides a set of 
questions  that  data  providers  and  re-distributors  can  use  to  develop  such  documentation. 
Documentation should be published alongside and/or included together in a dataset description, as 
outlined in the recommendations for Dataset Descriptions developed by the W3C Semantic Web in the 
Health  Care  and  Life  Sciences  Interest  Group  [16].  For  examples  of  such  documentation  see 
ChEMBL[17] and Monarch[18] ; the format may vary.  
Rule 10: Reference responsibly 
 
The final rule describes referencing recommendations for data redistributors: data aggregators, who 
collect information from different sources and re-display it; data publishers, who disseminate scientific 
knowledge through publications; and online reference material.   
 
When database identifiers are referenced in narrative online text, they should always be hyperlinked to 
their URIs or to metadata containing their URIs [e.g. 19, 20]. Where cross-references are displayed to 
humans (e.g. as in Monarch disease overview pages) consider using a CURIE notation whose prefix 
(see Rule 2) is as assigned by the data provider. Where machine parsing is intended (e.g. Monarch 
metadata landing pages), any CURIEs must be given together with a machine-parsable definition of 
the prefix-to-source mapping e.g. Monarch CURIE map. Access URLs are volatile (see Rule 4) and 
must not be used for referencing. This is especially relevant for bundled and transitive references to 
identifiers, such as those found in published bioinformatics pipelines (for example, Research Object or 
Galaxy). 
 

| Recommended handling                                                         | Example                               |
|:-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|:--------------------------------------|
| Obsoletion: If an entry has been removed or deprecated, the original         | Single obsoleted identifier:          |
| identifier must still resolve to a ‘tombstone page’. Reasons for             | http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/A0AV18 |
| obsolescence should be indicated. If the obsoleted ID is replaced by         | List of obsoleted identifiers:        |
| another ID, the replacement must be present and also described as            | uniprot.org/help/deleted_accessions   |
| automatic or suggested, preferably using the ontology properties             |                                       |
| iao:replaced_by and obo:consider, respectively.                              |                                       |
| The obsoleted ID must never be reassigned to another entity. A list of       |                                       |
| obsoleted IDs should be maintained.                                          |                                       |
| Merging: When two or more identifiers are merged, a new recipient            | UniProt entries Q57339 and O08022     |
| identifier should be designated as the primary (citable) one and should      | have been merged into Q00626.         |
| contain information about the legacy identifiers it encompasses. Any         | Q57339 and O08022 are redirected      |
| legacy identifiers should continue to resolve via redirection to the primary | to Q00626.                            |
| identifier.                                                                  |                                       |
| Splitting: If an identifier is split (demerged) into two or more new ones,   | UniProt entry P29358 has been split   |
| new identifiers should be assigned to all the new entries. The legacy        | into P68250 and P68251. P29358        |
| identifier must be obsoleted, must resolve, and should provide a warning     | displays a warning and links to the   |
| and pointers to the new ones as per above.                                   | demerged entries:                     |
|                                                                              | http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/P29358 |

7 of 8 
Where  there  exists  no  provider-issued  or  commonly-used  prefix  for  a  dataset,  the  data  distributor 
should  select  one,  preferably  after  discussion  with  the  data  provider.  Similar  documentation  best 
practices apply to data providers and redistributors (Table S6).  
 
Redistributors of data should monitor their references to other sources;  any ‘dead’ links should  be 
reported to the original data provider. If the original provider does not fix the broken link, the reference 
to  it  should  be  marked  obsolete  both  visibly  (for  user  interaction/interpretation),  and  within  any 
accompanying metadata (for computational interaction/propagation).   
Conclusion 
Better  identifier  design,  provisioning,  documentation,  and  referencing  can  address  many  of  the 
identifier problems encountered in the life science data cycle. We recognize that improvements to the 
quality, diversity, and uptake of identifier tooling would lower barriers to adoption of these rules. We 
will undertake to address these gaps in the relevant initiatives (Text S1). We also recognize the need 
for formal software-engineering specifications of identifier formats and/or alignment between existing 
specifications and hope that this paper can catalyze such efforts.  
 
 
Acknowledgments
J McMurry, T Burdett,  N Juty, and S Jupp were supported in part by the BioMedBridges project, which 
is funded by the European Union Seventh Framework Programme within Research Infrastructures of 
the FP7 Capacities Specific Programme, grant agreement number  284209.  EMBL-EBI core funds 
supported  H  Parkinson,  MJ  Martin,  J  McEntyre,  H  Hermjakob.  J  Malone.    ELIXIR  core  funds 
supported N Blomberg, R Jimenez. The European Commission provided additional support for Simon 
Jupp  under  grant  number  601043  (“DIACHRON”)  and  for  N  Juty  and  H  Hermjakob  under  grant 
number  312455  (“Infrastructure  for  Systems  Biology  -  Europe  (ISBE)”).  The  Drug  Disease  Model 
Resources  grant  number  DDMoRe  115156  (“Innovative  Medicines  Initiative”)  supported  C.  Laibe. 
Support  was  also  received  from  the  following  BBSRC  grants:  BB/L005050/1  (“ELIXIR-UK, 
Manchester”) for SA Sansone, A Gonzalez-Beltran and C Goble; BB/M013189/1 (“DMMCore”) for C 
Goble,  J  Snoep,  and  N  Stanford;  BB/K019783/1  (“Continued  development  of  ChEBI”)  and 
BB/M006891/1 (“EMPATHY”) for N Swainson; BB/M017702/1 (“SYNBIOCHEM”) for N Swainson and 
D  Fellows;  BBS/E/B/000C0419  (“A  systems  approach  to  understanding  lipid,  Ca2+  and  MAPK 
signalling  networks”)  for  N  Le  Novère;  BB/L005069/1  (“ELIXIR-UK,  Oxford”)  for  SA  Sansone,  A 
Gonzalez-Beltran  and  P  Rocca-Serra.  NIH  support  was  provided  from  the  following  grants: 
U41HG007822  (“UniProt”)  for  MJ  Martin;  U24AI117966-01  (“bioCADDIE”)  for  SA  Sansone,  A 
Gonzalez-Beltran and P Rocca-Serra; U54AI117925 (“CEDAR”) for SA Sansone, A Gonzalez-Beltran 
and P Rocca-Serra; R24OD011883 (“Semantic LAMHDI”) for CJ Mungall, MA Haendel, JA McMurry 
and  NL  Washington;  NHGRI  P41HG002273-09  (“Gene  Ontology  Consortium”)  for  CJ  Mungall. 
Additional  support  for  CJ  Mungall  and  NL  Washington  was  received  from  the  Director,  Office  of 
Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, of the U.S. Department of Energy under [Contract No. DE-
AC02-05CH11231]. 
 
The authors wish to thank Mary Todd Bergman, Ewan Birney, Fiona Cunningham, Richard Cyganiak, 
Adam Faulconbridge, Andrew M Jenkinson, Sirarat Sarntivijai, Stephanie Suhr, Nicole Vasilevsky, and 
Eleanor  Williams  for  their  valuable  feedback  and  suggestions.  We  also  wish  to  thank  the 
BioMedBridges Scientific Advisory Board for the suggestion to address this important issue and the 
reviewers for their constructive comments. 
 
 
 
 
 

8 of 8 
References 
 
1.  Van de Sompel H, Sanderson R, Shankar H, Klein M (2014) Persistent Identifiers for Scholarly Assets 
and the Web: The Need for an Unambiguous Mapping. International Journal of Digital Curation 9: 331-
342. doi: 10.2218/ijdc.v9i1.320 
2.  Data Citation Synthesis Group (2014) Joint Declaration of Data Citation Principles. Martone M. (ed.) San 
Diego  CA:  FORCE11.  [Internet]  Available:  [https://www.force11.org/datacitation.  Accessed:  23 
September 2015. 
3.  Altman M, Crosas M (2013) The Evolution of Data Citation: From Principles to Implementation. IASSIST 
Quarterly  37.  Available:  http://www.iassistdata.org/downloads/iqvol371_4_altman.pdf.  Accessed:  23 
September 2015. 
4.  Bandrowski  A,  Brush  M,  Grethe  JS,  Haendel  MA,  Kennedy  DN,  Hill  S,  et  al.  (2015)  The  Resource 
Identification Initiative: A cultural shift in publishing [version 1; referees: 2 approved] F1000Research 
2015, 4:134. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.6555.1 
5.  The  FAIR  data  Guiding  Principles  [Internet].  Available: 
https://www.force11.org/group/fairgroup/fairprinciples. Accessed:  23 September 2015. 
6.  Starr J, Castro E, Crosas M, Dumontier M, Downs RR, Duerr R, et al. (2015) Achieving human and 
machine  accessibility  of  cited  data  in  scholarly  publications.  PeerJ  PrePrints  3:e697v4. 
https://dx.doi.org/10.7287/peerj.preprints.697v4 
7.  Bradner  S  (1997)  Key  words  for  use  in  RFCs  to  Indicate  Requirement  Levels.  [Internet].  Available: 
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt. Accessed: 23 September 2015. 
8.  Local  Resource  Identifier  Scheme.  [Internet]  Available:  http://purl.org/spar/datacite/local-resource-
identifier-scheme. Accessed: 23 September 2015. 
9.  Zeeberg BR, Riss J, Kane DW, Bussey KJ, Uchio E, Linehan WM, et al. (2004) Mistaken identifiers: 
gene  name  errors  can  be  introduced  inadvertently  when  using  Excel  in  bioinformatics.  BMC 
Bioinformatics. 23: 80.  
10. Juty  N,  Le  Novère  N,  Hermjakob  H,  and  Laibe  C.  (2012)  Delivering  Cool  URIs  that  Don’t  Change. 
Proceedings  of  the  Semantic  Web  Applications  and  Tools  for  the  Life  Sciences  (SWAT4LS)  2012. 
http://ceur-ws.org/Vol-952/paper_4.pdf. 
11. Sporny M (2011) The Case for Curies. [Internet] Available: http://manu.sporny.org/2011/case-for-curies/.  
Accessed: 23 September 2015. 
12. W3C  Working  Group  (2010)  CURIE  Syntax  1.0.  [Internet]  Available:  http://www.w3.org/TR/curie/. 
Accessed: 23 September 2015. 
13. Kunze  J,  Rodgers  R.  ARK  Specification  [Internet]  Available: 
http://www.cdlib.org/services/uc3/arkspec.pdf. Accessed: 23 September 2015. 
14. Jain E, Bairoch A, Duvaud S, Phan I, Redaschi N, Suzek BE, et al. (2009) Infrastructure for the life 
sciences:  design  and  implementation  of  the  UniProt  website.  BMC  Bioinformatics.  10:  136.  doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-10-136. 
15. Kratz  J,  Strasser  C.  Data  publication  consensus  and  controversies  [v3;  ref  status:  indexed, 
http://f1000r.es/4ja] F1000Research 2014, 3:94 doi: 10.12688/f1000research.3979.3 
16. Gray  AJG,  Baran  J,  Marshall  MS,  Dumontier  M.  (2014)  Identifiers  in  Dataset  Descriptions:  HCLS 
Community  Profile.  In:  HCLS  Community  Profile  [Internet].  W3C  2014  -  .  Available: 
https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://github.com/indiedotkim/HCLSDatasetDescriptions/blob/master/Over
view.html#s6_3. Accessed: 23 September 2015. 
17. Complete Example of a Dataset Description http://www.w3.org/TR/hcls-dataset/#appendix_1. [Internet] 
Available:  http://www.w3.org/TR/hcls-dataset/#appendix_1  Accessed: 23 September 2015. 
18. DIPPER:  The  Monarch  Data  Ingest  Pipeline.  [Internet]  Available:    https://github.com/monarch-
initiative/dipper/blob/master/README.md#identifiers Accessed: 23 September 2015. 
19. Mietchen D, McEntyre J, Beck J, et al. (2015) Force11 Data Citation Implementation Group Adapting 
JATS to support data citation. In: Journal Article Tag Suite Conference (JATS-Con) Proceedings 2015 
[Internet]  Available:  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK280240/?report=classic.  Accessed:  23 
September 2015. 
20. Klein M, Van de Sompel H, Sanderson R, Shankar H, Balakireva L, Zhou K, et al. (2014) Scholarly 
context  not  found:  one  in  five  articles  suffers  from  reference  rot.  PLoS  One  9:  e115253.  doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0115253. eCollection 2014 
 