33RD INTERNATIONAL COSMIC RAY CONFERENCE, RIO DE JANEIRO 2013
THE ASTROPARTICLE PHYSICS CONFERENCE
Argentinian multi-wavelength scanning Raman lidar to observe night sky atmo-
spheric transmission
JUAN PALLOTTA1, PABLO RISTORI1, LIDIA OTERO1, FERNANDO CHOUZA1, D’EL´ IA RAU´ L1, FRANCISCO
GONZALEZ1, ALBERTO ETCHEGOYEN2, EDUARDO QUEL1 FOR THE CTA CONSORTIUM.
1 UNIDEF-CEILAP-(CITEDEF-CONICET), UMI-IFAECI-CNRS (3351) - Buenos Aires, Argentina.
2 ITeDA (CNEA CONICET - UNSAM) - Buenos Aires, Argentina.
pablo.ristori@gmail.com
Abstract: This paper discusses the multi-wavelength scanning Raman lidar being built at Lidar Division, CEILAP
(CITEDEF-CONICET) in the frame of the Argentinean Cherenkov Telescope Array (CTA) collaboration to
measure the spectral characteristics of the atmospheric aerosol extinction profiles to provide better transmission
3102 luJ 81  ]MI.hp-ortsa[  1v8205.7031:viXra
calculations at the future CTA site. This lidar emits short laser pulses of 7-9 ns at 355, 532 and 1064 nm at 50
Hz with nominal energy of 125 mJ at 1064 nm. This wavelengths are also used to retrieve the atmospheric (air,
aerosol and clouds) backscattered radiation in the UV, VIS and IR ranges. Raman capabilities were added in the
UV and VIS wavelengths to retrieve the spectral characteristics of the aerosol extinction and the water vapor
profile. Due to the expected low aerosol optical depth of the future site, the short observation period as well as the
extension of the observation, an enhanced collection area is required. This system uses six 40 cm f/2.5 newtonian
telescopes to avoid dealing with bigger mirror deformation, aberration issues and higher costs that imply the use
of a single mirror with the same collection surface. In addition, dismounting of single mirrors for replacement or
recoating will affect slightly the performance but not the operation. The additional alignment procedure has been
solved by an automatic mirror alignment to follow the line of sight of the observation during the acquisition period.
The system was designed to operate in hard environmental conditions, as it is completely exposed to the outside
weather conditions, when its shelter is fully opened to provide 360◦ observations.
Keywords: lidar, aerosols, atmosphere, CTA.
1 Introduction 2 Requirements for detection wavelength
range of the Lidar system
The range-dependent spectral atmospheric transmission in
the line of sight of the telescopes is of major interest to Due to the fact that aerosol layers increase the backscattered
radiation at the lidar emission wavelength, most of these
CTA. In this sense, multi-wavelength scanning Raman li-
lidars (called elastic lidars) are able to detect the presence
dars are able to acquire this information fast and accurately
of even small aerosol layers. For these systems, the lidar
[1]. While these systems are routinely used in regional net-
return can be expressed as follows:
works to provide information about aerosol extinction and
vertical distribution [1, 2, 3], CTA observation condition-
KG(r)r−2
P(r,λ ) = β(r,λ ,λ )T(r,λ )T(r,λ ) (1)
s are different and need special considerations. The most E E D E D
challenging requirements are related to the scanning capa-
in which K is a constant that takes into account terms
bilities and the fast acquisition time. Most of the systems
such as the laser energy, the collection surface and the
provide vertical observation profiles, which can be done overall system efficiency; G(r) is the fraction of the light
collectedbythetelescopethatissenttothedetector(overlap
placing the lidar in a clean and thermally stabilized room
function), β(r,λ ,λ ) is the atmospheric backscatter of the
with a rooftop aperture simplifying the system construction. E D
laser wavelength λ at the detected wavelength λ , T(r, λ )
E D E
Scanning lidars are out in the open exposed to the outside
and T(r, λ ) are the upwards laser transmission up to the
D
weather conditions, but also needs this kind of protection
the range r and downwards backscattered transmission to
to its critical parts (laser and laser optics) when they are the lidars telescope defined as:
measuring and the whole instruments needs a shelter, when
not in use. Acquisition time is basically a function of laser (cid:90) r
m p abs
T(r,λ) = exp(− (α (r,λ)+α (r,λ)+α (r,λ))dr)
energy, repetition rate, collection surface and reception op-
0
tical efficiency, which must be improved to attain accurate (2)
where αm(r,λ) is the extinction coefficient for
profiles in a short period of time. In addition, these lidars
molecules, αp(r,λ) is for particles, and αabs(r,λ) for ab-
are intended to be used remotely by an operator without
sorbing species. An extensive discussion of the lidar equa-
an a priori knowledge of lidar techniques. Therefore the
tion can be found in [5]. In the presence of a non-negligible
operation has to be simple, with most of the measurement
aerosol layer it is more convenient to measure the backscat-
specific processes running in a hidden layer. tered return at a wavelength free of aerosol backscatter.

Argentinean multi-wavelength scanning Raman lidar
33RD INTERNATIONAL COSMIC RAY CONFERENCE, RIO DE JANEIRO 2013
This can be done by measuring the backscattered vibro-
rotational nitrogen or oxygen Raman lines, pure rotational
Raman spectra or by measuring using high spectral resolu-
tion lidars. The first of these three options is the simplest to
achieve. The inversion equation is:
(cid:26) (cid:27)
d N(r)
p m
α (r,λ ) = ln −α (r,λ )
E E
dr r2P(r,λ )
v
m p
−α (r,λ )−α (r,λ ) (3)
ν ν
where N is the number of molecules and the sub-index
ν stands for the Raman shift produced by the selected
molecule (backscattered returns are red-shifted by 2331
cm−1 and 1556 cm−1 by the nitrogen and oxygen molecules
Fig.1: Atmospheric lidar return from an emission source
respectively). The fourth term which is unknown can be
estimated using the A˚ngstro¨m relation: of 100 mJ, 10 Hz repetition rate at 532 nm acquired by a 45
cm f/3 telescope during 15 minutes.
˚
(cid:26) (cid:27)A(r)
λ
p p E
α (r,λ ) = α (r,λ ) (4)
E ν
λ
ν
(Spain) and the Laboratoire Univers et Particules de Mont-
in which A˚(r) stands for the A˚ngstro¨m range-dependent pellier (LUPM) in Montpellier (France); while the second
coefficient that can be modeled or derived from a second option was chosen by Centro de Investigaciones en Lseres
elastic Raman wavelength [6, 7]. As Cherenkov telescopes y Aplicaciones (CEILAP) in Villa Martelli, Buenos Aires
detect polychromatic light, aerosol atmospheric transmis- (Argentina). Our reason to select the second option was the
sion for a single wavelength may not be appropriate to char- possibility to use standard 40 cm diameter, f/2.5 parabolic
acterize effects of a given air mass so the wavelength de- mirrors and 1 mm optical fibers (NA=0.22) to transfer the
pendency of the aerosol transmission must be considered.
collected light to the polychromator. This solution permits
From these requirements the Argentinean CTA collabora-
to extract any mirror for being recoated or exchanged keep-
tion decided to build a multiwavelength Raman lidar emit-
ing the other five mirrors in the system with a total system
ting in the fundamental, second and third harmonics of a
efficiency of 83 %. Furthermore mirror construction and
Nd:YAG laser (1064nm, 532nm and 355nm) and receiving
coating can be done by standard methods. Conversely an
these wavelengths and the nitrogen Raman shifted wave-
equivalent 98 cm diameter, f = 1 m single parabolic mirror
lengths from 532 nm (607 nm) and 355 nm (387 nm). A
telescope is difficult to create. The main drawback of the
sixth wavelength at 408 nm was also used to detect the wa-
chosen solution is that each of the six telescopes must be
ter vapor Raman return. The way that the knowledge of
aligned properly to attain maximum system efficiency. That
these parameters impacts over Cherenkov telescopes is de-
was the main subject that focused our attention.
scribed in [8, 9].
4 Prototype lidar construction
3 Lidar design
In the deployment process of this lidar we have designed
Lidar simulations can provide a first estimate of the lidar
first prototypes for every mechanical and electronic part.
profiles for a known atmosphere. As an example, 1 shows
Each prototype was tested and redesigned to be improved if
the simulated elastic signal (532 nm) and Raman returns
necessary. This was the case of the two actuators needed
for a well-mixed boundary layer in presence of mid altitude
to align a single mirror. The original actuators were based
clouds, measured with a 40 cm diameter, 100 cm focal
on differential screws and were different depending on the
length Newtonian telescope, emitting with a Nd:Yag laser
required degrees of freedom. The first tests were done using
(100 mJ @ 532 nm).
these actuators. With this experience, the final version was
The polychromator efficiency and the PMT quantum
simpler, lighter, more stable and using commercial ball
efficiency are 30% and 25% respectively. Elastic signal (in
joints at every articulated part. A single configuration was
blue, attenuated 100 times) and Raman signals (in green,
used for both actuators, while their degrees of freedom
red and cyan for nitrogen, oxygen and 100% humidity
were reduced/increased by tightening/untightening internal
water vapor, respectively) correspond to a US Standard
screws. Reducing the number of steps it was possible to
Atmosphere profile with ground pressure of 1013.25 Pa
and temperature of 15◦C and an adiabatic lapse rate of - replace the differential screws to standard ones. Figure 2
shows a scheme of both actuators at the same scale.
6.5 K/km. The aerosols in the atmospheric boundary layer
The multi-mirror telescope unit was designed to provide
are well mixed up to a height of 2 km and an entrainment
a maximum stability to the system with a minimum weight.
region of 100 m. The simulation is being performed with
and without the presence of a cloud at 4km. While honeycomb was used for the multi-mirror reference
To increase the lidar signal it is more effective to increase plane, carbon fiber tubes were used to place the optical fiber
the telescope collection surface. This can be done by in- at the mirror focal plane. Nylon pieces were synterized at
creasing the telescope diameter of a single mirror or increas- the end of the carbon tubes to provide better fixation. The
ing the number of mirrors. The first option was chosen by resulting setup (without carbon tubes) is shown on Figure 3.
the Institut de F´ısica dAltes Energies (IFAE) and the Univer- In a first stage the lidar structure was studied with a
sitat Autonoma de Barcelona (UAB), located in Barcelona single mirror and a laser emission to test its mechanical

Argentinean multi-wavelength scanning Raman lidar
33RD INTERNATIONAL COSMIC RAY CONFERENCE, RIO DE JANEIRO 2013
Fig.2: Left: first prototype with differential screws and me-
chanical parts on demand to provide smoother movements. Fig.5: Two different datasets for 532 nm and the correspon-
Right: final version with normal screws and more commer- dent Nitrogen Raman wavelength return signal. It can be
cial parts to achieve the same movements as the first proto- noticed the presence of several cloud layers in the elastic
type. channel and the efficiency of the Raman channel to block
the 532 nm returns in 607 nm channel.
experience of our colleagues in Barcelona and Montpellier
we have reinforced a standard 20 ft. shelter and we have
equipped it with hydraulic pistons conceived to open and
close it automatically as is shown on Figure 6. These and
other operations of the container will be included in the
lidar control software to automatize it for remote operation
this year.
Fig.3: Multi-mirror setup of the lidar system from the top
and lateral view showing the different stages of the system.
behavior during lidar operation. Figure 4 shows the lidar as
it was operated and Figure 5 the retrieved lidar profiles.
Fig.6: Lidar instrument inside the shelter based on a stan-
dard 20 feet container reinforced and adapted to be opened
by two hydraulic pistons at CEILAP.
6 Software
The whole multi-angle lidar is actually remotely controlled
using a Wi-Fi link from the control PC to the lidar shelter
creating a local lidar network under the TCP/IP protocol.
Both acquisition and shelter controls will be operated re-
Fig.4: First test of the lidar mechanical structure. A single
motely by the shifter. This control system is fully functional.
mirror was used combined with the laser source. The mirror
The operation scheme is presented in Figure 7.
structure was made for this experiment.
This kind of link has several advantages due to its data
bandwidth, simplicity and modularity. To accomplish that,
WiFi routers with Wireless Distribution System (WDS)
feature are used, with the lidar-side router working as access
5 New shelter-dome
point (AP). This AP distributes the lidar network data to
During 2012 a new shelter-dome to host the multiangle lidar the electronics: a Licel transient recorder rack (LICEL
was acquired. Based on the idea of CLUE shelter, we have transient recorder TR20-160, with Ethernet interface) and
adopted the same concept to host the lidar. Based on the a microcontroller. A MAC filter is set for both routers to

Argentinean multi-wavelength scanning Raman lidar
33RD INTERNATIONAL COSMIC RAY CONFERENCE, RIO DE JANEIRO 2013
ensure a reliable way to limit the endpoints connected to system construction, lidar testing, instrumentation control
the lidar network. and lidar signal processing.
Acknowledgment:Authors wish to thank CITEDEF main
workshops technicians, Mario Proyetti and Jos Luis Luque from
the CEILAP workshop for their support on this development. We
gratefully acknowledge support from the following agencies and
organizations: Ministerio de Ciencia, Tecnolog´ıa e Innovacio´n
Productiva (MinCyT), Comisio´n Nacional de Energ´ıa Ato´mica
(CNEA) and Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Cient´ıficas y
Te´cnicas (CONICET) Argentina; State Committee of Science of
Armenia; Ministry for Research, CNRS-INSU and CNRS-IN2P3,
Irfu-CEA, ANR, France; Max Planck Society, BMBF, DESY,
Helmholtz Association, Germany; MIUR, Italy; Netherlands Re-
search School for Astronomy (NOVA), Netherlands Organization
for Scientific Research (NWO); Ministry of Science and Higher
Education and the National Centre for Research and Development,
Poland;MICINNsupportthroughtheNationalR+D+I,CDTIfund-
ing plans and the CPAN and MultiDark Consolider-Ingenio 2010
programme, Spain; Swedish Research Council, Royal Swedish
Fig.7: Schematic diagram of the remote control proposed
Academy of Sciences financed, Sweden; Swiss National Science
for multiangle lidar system.
Foundation (SNSF), Switzerland; Leverhulme Trust, Royal So-
ciety, Science and Technologies Facilities Council, Durham Uni-
versity, UK; National Science Foundation, Department of Ener-
Acquisition process is developed in C/C++ and ROOT
gy, Argonne National Laboratory, University of California, Uni-
libraries, and the control of the shelter (open/close, turn versity of Chicago, Iowa State University, Institute for Nuclear
on/off devices, etc.) was built with a HTML interface. and Particle Astrophysics (INPAC-MRPI program), Washington
University McDonnell Center for the Space Sciences, USA. The
The automatic alignment for multiple telescopes is per-
research leading to these results has received funding from the
formed also using this program. From the lidar side a built-
European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme ([FP7/2007-
in Ethernet interface and integrated TCP/IP stack microcon-
2013] [FP7/2007-2011]) under grant agreement n 262053.
troller acts as interface to control electronic devices.
References
7 Work in progress and future plans
[1] Matthias, V., Balis, D., Bsenberg, J., Eixmann, R., Iarlori, M.,
Komguem, L., I. Mattis, I, Papayannis A., Pappalardo G.,
We currently develop a new concept design for the scan-
Perrone Wang, X., Vertical aerosol distribution over Europe:
ning system in collaboration of the Mechanical Department
Statistical analysis of Raman lidar data from 10 European
of CITEDEF. This structure that holds the hexagonal hon-
Aerosol Research Lidar Network (EARLINET) stations.
eycomb and structure below (laser, motors and drivers) is Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 109 (D18201).
much more compact than the existing one. We have planned doi:10.1029/2004JD004638, 2004
[2] Murayama, T., Sugimoto, N., Uno, I., Kinoshita, K., Aoki, K.,
the following tasks in the near future:
Hagiwara, N., Liu, Z., Matsui, I., Sakai, T., Shibata, T., Arao,
K., Sohn B-J., Won, J-G., Yoon, S-Ch., Li, T., Zhou, J., Hu, H.,
• Use the complete reception system with the six tele- Abo, Iokibe, K., Koga, R. and Iwasaka, Y., Groundbased
scopes in simultaneous alignment and measuring op- network observation of Asian dust events of April 1998 in East
Asia. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres
eration.
(19842012), 106(D16), 18345-18359. (2001).
[3] Bo¨senberg, J., Hoff, R. GAW Aerosol Lidar Observation
• Build spectrometric 6 lines (3 elastic + 3 Raman)
Network (GALION). WMO GAW Report, 178. (2008).
spectrometric box using the same optical configura- [4] R. M. Measures. Laser remote sensing: Fundamentals and
tion of the four other lidars being built at CEILAP Applications. Wiley-Interscience, 521 p (1984).
[5] Pappalardo, G., Amodeo, A., Pandolfi, M., Wandinger, U.,
and a fifth lidar operating since October 2012 at Co-
Ansmann, A., Bsenberg, J., Matthias, V., Amiridis, V., De
modoro Rivadavia. The most important difference
Tomasi, F., Frioud, M, Iarlori, M., Komguem, L., Papayannis,
will be its reduced size and optical fiber coupling.
A., Rocadenbosch, F., and Xuan Wang, Aerosol lidar
intercomparison in the framework of the EARLINET project.
• Build the motorized azimuthal-zenithal mechanism, 3, Raman lidar algorithm for aerosol extinction, backscatter,
providing the system with scanning capabilities. and lidar ratio. Applied Optics, 43(28), 5370-5385. (2004).
[6] L. Otero, P. Ristori, J. Dworniczak, O. Vilar, E. Quel, Nuevo
sistema lidar de seis longitudes de onda en el CEILAP, Anales
• Place the lidar with the motorized structure on the
AFA (Argentinean Physics Association), San Luis, (2006)
shelter to reach full operation condition of the system.
[7] I. Mattis, A. Ansmann, D. Mller, U. Wandinger, D. Althausen,
Multiyear aerosol observations with dual-wavelength Raman
lidar in the framework of EARLINET, Journal of Geophysical
8 Conclusions Research, 109, D13203, doi:10.1029/2004JD004600, 2004
[8] M. Doro, M. Gaug, O. Blanch, Ll. Font, D. Garrido, A.
The construction of the presented multiwavelength scan- Lopez-Oramas, M. Martnez, Towards a full Atmospheric
ning Raman lidar will be able to provide spectrally-resolved Calibration system for the CherenkovTelescope Array, these
proceedings, ID 0151.
aerosol extinction profiles to characterize the atmospheric
[9] D. Garrido, et al., Influence of atmospheric aerosols on the
transmission at any required line of sight and in a short peri-
performance of the MAGIC telescopes, these proceedings, ID
od of time. The modularity of the telescope system will per- 0465
mit the system maintenance and optimization while being
operated reducing non-operational times. The collaboration
of CEILAP, IFAE/UAB and LUPM to improve their lidar
systems will permit to attain the requested goals in terms of