AdaptiveCpp (formerly known as hipSYCL / Open SYCL)
(Note: ThisprojectiscurrentlyinprogressofchangingitsnametoAdaptiveCppduetoexternal
legal pressure. Documentation and code may still use the older name hipSYCL / Open SYCL)
AdaptiveCpp is the independent, community‑driven modern platform for C++‑based heterogeneous
programmingmodelstargetingCPUsandGPUsfromallmajorvendors. AdaptiveCppletsapplications
adapt themselves to all the hardware found in the system. This includes use cases where a single
binary needs to be able to target all supported hardware, or utilize hardware from different vendors
simultaneously.
It currently supports the following programming models: 1. SYCL: At its core is a highly competitive
and flexible SYCL implementation that supports many compilation flows. 2. C++ standard paral‑
lelism: Additionally, AdaptiveCpp features experimental support for offloading C++ algorithms from
the parallel STL. See here for details on which algorithms can be offloaded. AdaptiveCpp is cur‑
rentlytheonlysolutioncapableofdemonstratingC++standardparallelismperformanceacross
NVIDIA, AMD and Intel GPUs, and in most cases outperforms vendor compilers.
AdaptiveCpp supports CPUs (including x86, arm and other LLVM‑supported architectures) as well as
GPUsfromIntel,NVIDIA,andAMD.Thisincludestheabilitytogenerateasinglebinarythatcanoffload
to all supported devices.
AdaptiveCpp’s compilation flows include 1. A powerful, generic LLVM JIT compiler. This is Adap‑
tiveCpp’sdefault, mostportableandusuallymostperformantcompilationflow. Itisalsotheworld’s
only SYCL compiler that only needs to parse the source code a single time across both host and
device compilation. 2. Compilation flows focused on providing interoperability at source code level
with vendor programming models (including e.g. the ability to mix‑and‑match CUDA and SYCL in the
same source file) 3. Library‑only compilation flows focused on deployment simplicity. These compi‑
lation flows allow utilizing third‑party compilers, with AdaptiveCpp merely acting as a library.
A full list of its compilation capabilities can be found here.
BecauseaprogramcompiledwithAdaptiveCppappearsjustlikeanyotherprogramwritteninvendor‑
supported programming models (like CUDA or HIP) to vendor‑provided software, vendor tools such
as profilers or debuggers also work with AdaptiveCpp.
1

An illustration on how the project fits into the SYCL ecosystem can be found (here).
Performance & benchmarking
See the AdaptiveCpp performance guide.
Installing and using AdaptiveCpp
• Building & Installing
In order to compile software with AdaptiveCpp, use acpp. acpp can be used like a regular compiler,
i.e. you can use acpp -o test test.cpp to compile your application called test.cpp with
AdaptiveCpp.
acpp accepts both command line arguments and environment variables to configure its behavior
(e.g., to select the target to compile for). See acpp --help for a comprehensive list of options.
For details and instructions on using AdaptiveCpp in CMake projects, please see the documentation
on using AdaptiveCpp.
About the project
Development of AdaptiveCpp is currently primarily led by Heidelberg University, with contributions
from a growing community. We see AdaptiveCpp as a community‑driven project, in contrast to the
many vendor‑driven heterogeneous compiler efforts. AdaptiveCpp not only serves as a research plat‑
form, but is also a solution used in production on machines of all scales, including some of the most
powerful supercomputers.
Getting in touch
Join us on Discord! Alternatively, open a discussion or issue in this repository.
Contributing to AdaptiveCpp
We encourage contributions and are looking forward to your pull request! Please have a look at CO
NTRIBUTING.md. If you need any guidance, please just open an issue and we will get back to you
shortly.
2

If your institution or organization is considering to support the AdaptiveCpp development in some
official capacity, we are always happy to discuss collaborations and to broaden the developer com‑
munity. Please do reach out :‑)
If you are a student at Heidelberg University and wish to work on AdaptiveCpp, please get in touch
with us. There are various options possible and we are happy to include you in the project :‑)
Citing AdaptiveCpp
AdaptiveCpp is a production platform for heterogeneous computing, but also a research project. As
such, if you use AdaptiveCpp in your research, we kindly request that you cite one of the following
publications, depending on your focus:
• A general overview, SYCL 2020, performance and the relationship with oneAPI: Aksel Al‑
pay, Bálint Soproni, Holger Wünsche, and Vincent Heuveline. 2022. Exploring the possi‑
bility of a hipSYCL‑based implementation of oneAPI. In International Workshop on OpenCL
(IWOCL’22). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 10, 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3529538.3530005
• The generic single‑pass compiler: Aksel Alpay and Vincent Heuveline. 2023. One Pass to Bind
Them: TheFirstSingle‑PassSYCLCompilerwithUnifiedCodeRepresentationAcrossBackends. In
Proceedings of the 2023 International Workshop on OpenCL (IWOCL ’23). Association for Comput‑
ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 7, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3585341.3585351
• Our CPU compiler: Joachim Meyer, Aksel Alpay, Sebastian Hack, Holger Fröning, and Vincent
Heuveline. 2023. Implementation Techniques for SPMD Kernels on CPUs. In Proceedings of the
2023 International Workshop on OpenCL (IWOCL ’23). Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, Article 1, 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1145/3585341.3585342
• The original talk and the idea of implementing SYCL on non‑OpenCL backends: Ak‑
sel Alpay and Vincent Heuveline. 2020. SYCL beyond OpenCL: The architecture, current
state and future direction of hipSYCL. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on
OpenCL (IWOCL ’20). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 8, 1.
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3388333.3388658
(The latter is a talk and available online. Note that some of the content in this talk is outdated by
now)
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge contributions from the community.
3

Documentation
• AdaptiveCpp design and architecture
• AdaptiveCpp runtime specification
• AdaptiveCpp compilation model
• How to use raw HIP/CUDA inside AdaptiveCpp code to create optimized code paths
• A simple SYCL example code for testing purposes can be found here.
• SYCL Extensions implemented in AdaptiveCpp
• Macros used by AdaptiveCpp
• Environment variables supported by AdaptiveCpp
4