1  EJAP-D-20-01102-R1 
2   
3   
4  Changes in plasma hydroxyproline and plasma cell-free DNA 
5  concentrations after higher- versus lower-intensity eccentric cycling 
6   
7   
8  Georgios Mavropalias1,2, Leslie Calapre2, Michael Morici2, Tomoko Koeda3,  
9  Wayne C.K. Poon2, Oliver R. Barley2, Elin Gray2,  
10  Anthony J. Blazevich2, Kazunori Nosaka2 
11   
12   
13  1Exercise Medicine Research Institute, Edith Cowan University, Australia 
14  2School of Medical and Health Sciences, Edith Cowan University, Australia 
15  3Faculty of Rehabilitation Sciences, Nagoya Gakuin University, Japan 
16   
17  Running head: Hyp and cfDNA after eccentric cycling 
18   
19   
20   
21  Corresponding author:  
22  Georgios Mavropalias  
23  School of Medical and Health Sciences 
24  Edith Cowan University 
25  270 Joondalup Drive, Joondalup, WA, 6027, Australia 
26  Email: georgios.mavropalias@gmail.com 
27  Phone: +61 411 89 69 02 
28  ORCID: 0000-0001-7753-5693   
1 
 

29  ABSTRACT 
30  Purpose: We examined changes in plasma creatine kinase (CK) activity, hydroxyproline and 
31  cell-free DNA (cfDNA) concentrations in relation to changes in maximum voluntary isometric 
32  contraction (MVIC) torque and delayed-onset muscle soreness (DOMS) following a session of 
33  volume-matched higher- (HI) versus lower-intensity (LI) eccentric cycling exercise. 
34  Methods: Healthy young men performed either 5×1-min HI at 20% of peak power output 
35  (n=11) or 5×4-min LI eccentric cycling at 5% of peak power output (n=9). Changes in knee 
36  extensor  MVIC  torque,  DOMS,  plasma  CK  activity,  and  hydroxyproline  and  cfDNA 
37  concentrations before, immediately after, and 24-72 h post-exercise were compared between 
38  groups. 
39  Results: Plasma CK activity increased post-exercise (141±73.5%) and MVIC torque decreased 
40  from immediately (13.3±7.8%) to 48 h (6.7±13.5%) post-exercise (P<0.05), without significant 
41  differences between groups. DOMS was greater after HI (peak: 4.5±3.0 on a 10-point scale) 
42  than LI (1.2±1.0). Hydroxyproline concentration increased 40-53% at 24-72 h after both LI and 
43  HI (P<0.05). cfDNA concentration increased immediately after HI only (2.3±0.9 fold, P<0.001), 
44  with a significant difference between groups (P=0.002). Lack of detectable methylated HOXD4 
45  indicated that the cfDNA was not derived from skeletal muscle. No significant correlations 
46  were  evident  between  the  magnitude  of  change  in  the  measures,  but  the  cfDNA  increase 
47  immediately post-exercise was correlated with the maximal change in heart rate during exercise 
48  (r=0.513, P=0.025). 
49  Conclusion:  Changes  in  plasma  hydroxyproline  and  cfDNA  concentrations  were  not 
50  associated with muscle fiber damage, but the increased hydroxyproline in both groups suggests 
51  increased collagen turnover. cfDNA may be a useful metabolic-intensity exercise marker. 
52   
2 
 

53  Keywords:  eccentric  exercise;  maximal  voluntary  isometric  contraction;  muscle  damage; 
54  delayed onset muscle soreness; connective tissue; extracellular matrix   
3 
 

55  ABBREVIATIONS 
56   
cfDNA  cell-free DNA 
CK  Creatine kinase 
ddPCR  droplet digital PCR 
DOMS  Delayed-onset muscle soreness 
HI  Higher intensity 
HR  Heart rate 
Hyp  Hydroxyproline 
LI  Lower intensity 
MVIC  Maximal voluntary isometric contraction 
PPO  Peak power output 
RPE  Rate of perceived effort 
57   
58     
4 
 

59  INTRODUCTION 
60  Unaccustomed  exercise  consisting  of  eccentric  (lengthening)  muscle  actions  (i.e., 
61  eccentric exercise) has been shown to induce muscle damage represented by delayed onset 
62  muscle  soreness  (DOMS),  prolonged  decreases  in  muscle  function,  muscle  swelling,  and 
63  increases in intramuscular proteins such as creatine kinase (CK) in the blood (Clarkson et al. 
64  1992). Eccentric cycling is an eccentric exercise modality in which knee extensor muscles 
65  perform submaximal eccentric muscle actions when resisting to backward rotations of a motor-
66  driven ergometer. The number of studies investigating eccentric cycling have increased in the 
67  last 20 years, with many reporting positive effects on muscle mass and strength (LaStayo et al. 
68  2000; Julian et al. 2018). 
69  It has been reported that DOMS is more associated with damage to and inflammation 
70  within the muscular connective tissues, rather than to muscle fibers themselves (Crameri et al. 
71  2007; Paulsen et al. 2010). Some studies have shown increases in collagen breakdown markers 
72  such as hydroxyproline (Hyp) in urine (Brown et al. 1997) and blood (Brown et al. 1999) after 
73  maximal eccentric knee  extensor exercise. Since intramuscular connective tissues transmit 
74  force and thus strongly influence muscle force output (Grounds et al. 2005), it is possible that 
75  a prolonged decrease in muscle strength after eccentric exercise is also associated with damage 
76  to connective tissues.  
77  Our previous study showed a greater extent of DOMS after work-matched higher- than 
78  lower-intensity  eccentric  cycling  without  significant  differences  in  maximal  voluntary 
79  isometric  contraction  (MVIC)  strength  and  plasma  CK  activity  changes  between  the  two 
80  protocols  (Mavropalias  et  al.  2020).  If  DOMS  is  more  associated  with  connective  tissue 
81  damage  than  muscle  fiber damage,  it  may  be  that  greater  connective  tissue  breakdown  is 
82  observed  after  higher-  than  lower-intensity  eccentric  cycling.  Hyp  is  a  non-proteinogenic 
83  amino acid and a major component of collagen, critical to the stabilization of the collagen triple 
5 
 

84  helix (Kotch et al. 2008). Therefore, an increase in blood or urine Hyp concentration is assumed 
85  to indicate muscle collagen breakdown (Murguia et al. 1988). Since mechanical impact due to 
86  gravity is minimal during cycling (Woodward and Cunningham 1993), it seems likely that 
87  increased Hyp concentration in the blood is from muscle connective tissue rather than bone 
88  origin. It is possible that changes in blood Hyp concentration and the magnitude of muscle 
89  functional loss and DOMS after eccentric cycling are highly associated, which would provide 
90  greater insight on the involvement of the muscle connective tissues to these eccentric exercise-
91  induced phenomena. 
92  Some studies have used blood cell-free DNA (cfDNA) as a muscle damage marker 
93  (Ferrandi et al. 2018; Andreatta et al. 2018). cfDNAs are circulating cell-unbound, double-
94  stranded DNA fragments (Breitbach et al. 2012), normally present in a small amount in the 
95  blood, but shown to increase after intense exercises such as running, cycling, and resistance 
96  training (Atamaniuk et al. 2004, 2008, 2010; Tug et al. 2017a; Andreatta et al. 2018). For 
97  example, Andreatta et al. (2018) compared high- (80% of one-repetition maximum) and low-
98  intensity (40%) leg press exercise (30 and 75 repetitions, respectively), and reported that serum 
99  cfDNA concentration increased 1.6-fold at immediately after the high-intensity exercise only, 
100  and the increase was correlated with the magnitude of decrease in squat and counter-movement 
101  jump height. The authors concluded that cfDNA levels were sensitive to the exercise intensity 
102  and  that  they  could  serve  as  a  promising  muscle  damage  marker  (Andreatta  et  al.  2018). 
103  However, the resistance exercise performed in the study by Andreatta et al. (2018) consisted 
104  of both concentric and eccentric actions, and to the best of our knowledge no previous study 
105  has examined changes in cfDNA after exercise consisting of eccentric-only muscle actions, to 
106  investigate possible associations with muscle damage phenomena. Haller et al. (2018) reported 
107  that  increases  in  blood  cfDNA  concentration  were  positively  correlated  with  the  rate  of 
108  perceived exertion, and increased progressively with increasing running duration and intensity. 
6 
 

109  Thus, comparison between higher- and lower-intensity eccentric cycling with a matched total 
110  mechanical work may clarify whether post-exercise increases in cfDNA blood concentrations 
111  are more related to muscle damage or metabolic load. The origin of cfDNA has been a matter 
112  of speculation, but it has been hypothesized that it originates either from neutrophils (Breitbach 
113  et al. 2014; Beiter et al. 2014) or skeletal muscle cells (Atamaniuk et al. 2010; Ferrandi et al. 
114  2018). It is of interest to examine whether eccentric cycling induces increase in plasma cfDNA 
115  concentration, and whether its changes are associated with the magnitude of changes in muscle 
116  strength, muscle soreness and plasma CK activity, together with the source of increased plasma 
117  cfDNA.  
118  Given the above, the purpose of this study was to compare between higher- and lower-
119  intensity eccentric cycling with the same total mechanical work for changes in plasma Hyp and 
120  cfDNA concentrations in relation to other indirect muscle damage markers such as plasma CK 
121  activity, muscle strength, and DOMS. Moreover, we evaluated whether the plasma cfDNA 
122  originated  from  skeletal  muscle  by  targeting  an  epigenetic  marker,  and  whether  any 
123  associations exist between changes in plasma cfDNA or Hyp concentrations and both muscle 
124  strength loss and DOMS. 
125   
126  METHODS 
127  Participants  
128  The  sample  size  was  estimated  using  G*Power  (Version  3.1.9.2,  Universitat  Kiel, 
129  Germany) based on the study by Paschalis et al. (2005), who compared responses to high- and 
130  low-intensity eccentric knee extensions, showing a greater decrease in MVIC torque after the 
131  high- than low-intensity eccentric exercise with an effect size of 1.34. With a power level of 
132  0.8, and an alpha level of 0.05, it was found that a total of 18 participants were required, thus 
133  at least 9 participants were required in each group. 
7 
 

134  Based on this, 20 men who were unaccustomed to eccentric exercises and free from 
135  lower limb injuries for at least 6 months prior to the study were recruited for this study. The 
136  participants were instructed not to deviate from their regular dietary patterns and to not perform 
137  any exercise during the experimental period. They were randomly allocated to either a higher-
138  intensity eccentric cycling group (HI, n=11) or a lower-intensity eccentric cycling group (LI, 
139  n=9). No significant differences between the HI and LI groups were found for age (25.3 ± 3.6 
140  vs 24.7 ± 5.9 y, p = 0.781), height (181.2 ± 7.2 vs 178.6 ± 8.6 cm, p = 0.467), and body mass 
141  (83.3  ±  11.4  kg  vs  75.7  ±  10.2  kg,    p  =  0.139).  Ethical  approval  from  the  Edith  Cowan 
142  University human research ethics committee was provided before study commencement, and 
143  every participant gave informed consent before participating in the study. The collection of 
144  blood samples was conducted in accordance with all applicable laws, guidelines, and regulation. 
145   
146  Eccentric cycling 
147  Using an eccentric cycle ergometer (Grucox Eccentric Trainer, Grucox, South Africa), 
148  participants completed a 2-min concentric cycling warm-up at 50 W after an appropriate seat 
149  position was determined by the investigator in relation to their leg length. Peak power output 
150  during a maximal 10-s isokinetic concentric cycling at 60 rpm (PPO) was determined for each 
151  participant to set the intensity of the eccentric cycling. This was used in the previous study 
152  (Mavropalias et al. 2020), and peak power output measure during eccentric cycling was not 
153  used, because of potential muscle damage and the repeated bout effect that could affect the 
154  outcome measures (Peñailillo et al. 2013). Participants in HI performed eccentric cycling at 20% 
155  PPO for 5 sets of 1 min with a 1-min rest between sets, and those in LI performed eccentric 
156  cycling at 5% of PPO for 5 sets of 4 min with a 1-min rest between sets in order to achieve 
157  equal total mechanical work. Our pilot studies showed that 20% PPO required high effort but 
158  was a feasible target workload for participants who were unaccustomed to eccentric cycling to 
8 
 

159  cycle at 60 rpm for 1 min, while 5% PPO was chosen as an intensity that was largely different 
160  (4-fold) from the 20% PPO, but still induced muscle damage following an unnacustommed 
161  bout  (Mavropalias  et  al.  2020).  Each  participant  performed  1-min  of  eccentric  cycling 
162  familiarization  immediately  before  performing  HI  or  LI  eccentric  cycling,  during  which 
163  eccentric cycling was started from 30 rpm reaching 60 rpm at the end of the minute at the target 
164  power output. The participants were instructed to resist the pedals by using the lower limbs to 
165  perform smooth backward rotations while maintaining their target power, which was shown on 
166  a computer screen set in front of the ergometer. The pedal straps were removed from the 
167  ergometer to ensure the participants only pushed against the pedals and did not pull when the 
168  pedals were moving away from them to generate power using their knee and hip flexors. 
169  Moreover, visual feedback was provided by the ergometer computer in relation to the muscle 
170  action type (concentric: green bar vs eccentric: blue bar) according to the forces applied to its 
171  pedals and the angle of the crank to ensure the participants were not performing concentric 
172  actions.  The  investigator  constantly  monitored  the  screen  to  ensure  the  participants  only 
173  performed eccentric muscle actions. In addition, the use of a motorized ergometer allowed the 
174  knee extensors to shorten passively during the muscle shortening phase. 
175  Heart rate (HR) during cycling was continuously recorded by a HR monitor (Polar 
176  S810i, Polar Electro, Finland). Rating of perceived effort (RPE) was assessed at the end of each 
177  set  using  a  modified  version  of  Borg’s  category-ratio  scale  (0  –10;  0:  nothing  at  all,  10: 
178  maximal effort) (Borg 1998), as it has been reported that measuring effort during eccentric 
179  cycling is more appropriate than exertion (Peñailillo et al. 2018). At the end of each set, the 
180  participants were asked to rate their physical effort required by their knee extensors to maintain 
181  the target power. 
182   
9 
 

183  Maximal voluntary isometric contraction (MVIC) torque 
184  An isokinetic dynamometer (System 3, Biodex Medical Systems, USA) was used to 
185  assess MVIC torque, before, immediately after, and 24, 48, and 72 h after exercise. During 
186  measurements, visual feedback of torque was displayed on a computer screen via a computer 
187  software (LabVIEW, National Instruments, Australia). MVIC torque was measured from the 
188  right knee extensors at knee joint angles of 20° and 70° after several submaximal contractions 
189  as warm-up. Three 4-s maximal voluntary isometric knee extensions were performed at each 
190  joint angle, separated by 1 min of passive rest. Participants were advised not to perform any 
191  countermovement motion before the muscle action. The highest torque value from each angle 
192  was used as a percentage of change compared to the baseline of the respective test, and the 
193  average of those values for each angle at each timepoint was used for further analysis. 
194   
195  Muscle soreness 
196  The magnitude of lower-limb soreness was assessed during movement at the same time 
197  points as those of MVIC. Participants were then asked to sit down to and stand up from a chair 
198  slowly (~3 s for each direction), and to report their perceived soreness in each direction using 
199  a  custom  0  (no  soreness)  –  10  (maximal  soreness)  scale.  The  average  values  of  the  two 
200  directions of movement at each time point were used for subsequent statistical analysis. 
201   
202  Blood sampling  
203  A venous blood sample was collected from an antecubital vein to two 6-mL EDTA 
204  tubes at before, immediately after, as well as 24, 48, and 72 h after exercise, before other 
205  measures  were  obtained.  The  tubes  were  centrifuged  in  a  swing  bucket  rotor  centrifuge 
206  (Heraeus Multifuge 3 SR, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) at 1600 g for 10 min and the plasma 
207  was separated to a 15-mL conical tube. The plasma was then further centrifuged at 2000 g for 
10 
 

208  10 min and supernatant-aliquoted to several microtubes and stored at -80° C for subsequent 
209  Hyp and cfDNA analyses. 
210   
211  Plasma creatine kinase (CK) activity 
212  A 30-μL whole blood sample was pipetted from the EDTA tube and loaded to a strip 
213  for  CK  activity  analysis  using  a  Reflotron  (Roche  Diagnosis,  Switzerland).  This  analysis 
214  provides plasma CK activity. 
215   
216  Plasma hydroxyproline (Hyp) concentration 
217  For the assessment of plasma Hyp concentration, 125 μl of plasma sample was mixed 
218  with 125 μl of 12 N hydrochloric acid and then hydrolyzed for 24 h at 95°C. The mixture was 
219  left  to  cool,  and  subsequently  filtered  through  a  0.22  μm  PVDF  syringe  filter  unit.  The 
220  supernatants were analyzed based on the manufacturer’s guidelines using a colorimetric kit 
221  (Cell Biolabs, Inc., USA), which allowed the determination of Hyp concentration through the 
222  reaction of oxidized hydroxyproline with 4-(dimethylamino) benzaldehyde. 
223   
224  Plasma cfDNA concentration  
225  Between 2 and 5 mL of plasma were used for cfDNA isolation using the QIAamp 
226  Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. 
227  Cell free DNA was quantified by droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) using QX200 AutoDG (Bio-
228  Rad, Hercules, CA). Two DNA loci were used for quantification on the AR (X-chromosome) 
229  and  BAP1  (Chromosome  3)  genes  using  commercial  assays  for  ddPCR  (Bio-Rad). 
230  Amplifications were performed using the following cycling conditions: 1 cycle of 95°C (2.5C/s 
231  ramp) for 10 min, 40 cycles of 94°C (2.5C/s ramp) for 30 s and 57°C for 1 min, followed by 1 
11 
 

232  cycle of 98°C (2.5C/s ramp) for 10 min. Copies of cfDNA per mL of plasma were calculated 
233  based on the volume of plasma used for extraction and elution volume.  
234   
235  cfDNA origin 
236  Five samples from the HI group with significant increase in DNA copies post exercise 
237  were further quantified using the 2100 Bioanalyzer systems (Agilent, USA). To examine if the 
238  cfDNA was derived from skeletal muscles, the presence of methylated HOXD4 promoter was 
239  examined. To evaluate the specificity of primers and probes, a primary human myoblast line 
240  and melanoma cell lines (92.1, Mel 270) were used as biological positive and negative controls, 
241  respectively. The primers and probes used are as follow: 
242   
243    Forward PCR primer: 5’ - TTT TCC AAT TCT AAA ACT TAC TAC C – 3’ 
244  Reverse primer: 5’ - TTT TCC AAT TCT AAA ACT TAC TAC C – 3’ 
245  Methylated probes (/56-FAM/AA GCG GTT T/ZEN/C GAA CGG TTT A/3IABkFQ/) 
246  Unmethylated (/5HEX/AA GTG GTT T/ZEN/T GAA TGG TTT A/3IABkFQ/) 
247   
248  Mastermix reagents included: 1X ddPCR supermix (Bio-Rad), 250 nM probes, 900 nM 
249  of each primer, 50 nM 7-Deaza (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA). Droplets were generated 
250  using the Automatic Droplet generator QX200 AutoDG (Bio-Rad). PCR Cycle involved: 1 
251  cycle of 95°C (2.5C/s ramp) for 10 min, 40 cycles of 94°C (2.5C/s ramp) for 30 s and 57°C for 
252  1 minute, followed by 1 cycle of 98°C (2.5C/s ramp) for 10 min. Droplets were analyzed 
253  through a QX200 Droplet Reader (Bio-Rad). QuantaSoft analysis software (Bio-Rad) was used 
254  to acquire and analyze data. 
255   
12 
 

256  Statistical analyses 
257  Baseline  values  of  all  depedent  variables  were  compared  between  groups  using  a 
258  Student’s t-test. A two-way (group × time) repeated-measures analysis of variance was used to 
259  compare between HI and LI groups for changes in the dependent variables over time. The data 
260  were assessed for assumptions of normality by analysing the standardized residuals using a 
261  Shapiro-Wilk test, and for sphericity by a Mauchly's sphericity test. Partial eta squared values 
262  (η2 ) are also reported as a measure of factor variation size. Ordinal data (muscle soreness and 
p
263  RPE) were rank-transformed before being analyzed through the repeated-measures analysis of 
264  variance  (Wobbrock  et  al.  2011).  In  the  case  of a  significant  interaction  effect,  a  Holm’s 
265  sequential  Bonferroni  correction  was  performed  to  identify  possible  differences  between 
266  groups  for  each  time  point.  Correlation  analyses  were  performed  using  Pearson  product-
267  moment correlation (r) for continuous data, whereas a Spearman correlation (ρ) was used for 
268  ordinal  data  (muscle  soreness  and  RPE).  The  significance  level  was  set  to  P  ≤  0.05.  All 
269  statistical testing was performed using Jamovi version 1.6.3 (Jamovi project, 2018). Data are 
270  presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD). 
271   
272  RESULTS 
273  Heart rate and effort during eccentric cycling 
274  Average heart rate during eccentric cycling was greater (P < 0.001) in HI (130.4 ± 16.6 
275  bpm) than LI (and 108.1 ± 18.7 bpm). Average RPE was also greater (P < 0.05) for HI (5.1 ± 
276  2.2) than LI (3.0 ± 0.9). 
277   
278  MVIC torque and muscle soreness 
279  MVIC torque and DOMS values are shown in Figure 1. MVIC torque (average torque 
280  of knee joint angles of 20° and 70°) decreased from the baseline (P < 0.01, time η2 = 0.321) 
p 
13 
 

281  immediately (-13.3 ± 7.8%), 24 h (-9.7 ± 10.7%), and 48 h (-6.7 ± 13.5%) after eccentric 
282  cycling without a significant difference between HI and LI groups (P = 0.173, interaction η2
p 
283  = 0.091). Muscle soreness increased at 24 – 72 h after exercise in both groups (P = 0.016, time 
284  η2 = 0.413), but maximal muscle soreness (mean of maximal values per group across all time 
p 
285  points) was greater (P < 0.05, interaction η2 = 0.225) in HI (4.5 ± 3.0) than LI (1.2 ± 1.0). 
p 
286   
287  Plasma CK activity 
288  A significant increase in plasma CK activity from the baseline was found only at 24 h 
289  post-exercise (141 ± 73.5%, P = 0.029, time η2 = 0.194), but this increase did not  differ 
p 
290  significantly between the groups (P = 0.268, interaction η2 = 0.070). The average CK activity 
p 
291  of both groups was 248.2 ± 272.5 IU/L at 24 h, 176.5 ± 172.8 IU/L at 48 h, and 142.1 ± 112.9 
292  IU/L at 72 h post-exercise. 
293   
294  Plasma Hyp concentration  
295  Baseline Hyp concentration was 24.3 ± 5.9 μg/mL for HI and 27.9 ± 8.2 μg/mL for LI 
296  without  difference  between  groups  (P  =  0.286).  As  shown  in  Figure  2,  plasma  Hyp 
297  concentration increased significantly at 24 – 72 h after cycling by 40 – 53% from baseline for 
298  both HI and LI (P < 0.001, time η2 = 0.576) with no significant difference between the groups 
p 
299  at any time point (P = 0.518, interaction η2 = 0.032). 
p 
300   
301  Plasma cfDNA concentration and its origin 
302  Pre-exercise plasma cfDNA concentrations were similar between the groups, with 233 
303  ±  129  copies/mL  for  HI  and  203  ±  78.4  copies/mL  for  LI  (P  =  0.552).  Plasma  cfDNA 
304  concentrations increased from pre- to post-exercise in HI (Figure 3, P < 0.001, time η2 = 0.464), 
p 
305  returning to baseline levels by 24 h post-exercise. HI showed a significantly greater increase in 
14 
 

306  plasma cfDNA concentration than LI group post-exercise (2.3 ± 0.9-fold, P = 0.002, interaction 
307  η2 = 0.230). 
p 
308  Five samples in the HI group with significant increase in DNA copies post exercise by 
309  ddPCR  and  with  a  high  overall  cfDNA  yield  via  chip-based  capillary  electrophoresis 
310  (Bioanalyzer), were selected for downstream methylation analysis of HOXD4. The upstream 
311  region  of  HOXD4  contains  two  myogenic  hypermethylated  sites  with  high  specificity  for 
312  muscle derived DNA (Ehrlich and Lacey 2013). We evaluated whether the increase on cfDNA 
313  was  muscle  derived  using  a  ddPCR  assay  specific  for  this  epigenetic  change.  However, 
314  methylated HOXD4 was not detectable in the cfDNA of the five samples pairs analyzed (Figure 
315  4). 
316   
317  Correlations 
318  Figure 5 shows some of the correlation analysis results. No significant correlations were 
319  observed between the maximal decrease in MVIC torque at 24 to 72 h post-exercise and peak 
320  change in Hyp concentration (r = 0.114, P = 0.631), pre- to post-exercise change in cfDNA 
321  concentration (r = -0.425, P = 0.070), or maximal change in CK activity (r = -0.430, P = 0.058). 
322  No  significant  correlations  were  detected  between  maximal  muscle  soreness  and  maximal 
323  change in Hyp concentration (ρ = -0.111, P = 0.642), pre- to post-exercise change in cfDNA 
324  concentration (ρ = 0.354, P = 0.137), or maximal change in CK activity (ρ = 0.042, P = 0.859). 
325  There were no significant correlations between maximal change in CK activity and 
326  maximal change in Hyp concentration (r = -0.015, P = 0.950) or between maximal change in 
327  Hyp concentration and pre- to post-exercise change in cfDNA concentration (r = -0.228, P = 
328  0.347). Although the change in cfDNA concentration from pre- to post-exercise significantly 
329  correlated  with  maximal  change  in  CK  activity  (r  =  0.577,  P  =  0.010),  it  was  no  longer 
15 
 

330  significantly correlated (r = 0.285, P = 0.251) when one outlier was removed who showed an 
331  increase of 686 IU/L (919% increase). 
332  There were no significant correlations between maximal change in CK activity and 
333  maximal change in HR (r = 0.251, P = 0.287) or maximal RPE (ρ = 0.372, P = 0.106), or 
334  maximal change in Hyp concentration and maximal change in HR (r = 0.157, P = 0.522). 
335  However, maximal change in Hyp concentration was significantly correlated with maximal 
336  RPE (ρ = 0.678, P = 0.001), and the pre- to post-exercise change in cfDNA concentration was 
337  significantly correlated with the maximal change in HR (r = 0.513, P = 0.025) and maximal 
338  RPE (ρ = 0.473, P = 0.041). 
339   
340  DISCUSSION 
341  The present results revealed a significant increase in plasma Hyp concentration at 24 – 
342  72 h after exercise with no detectible differences between HI and LI eccentric cycling groups. 
343  Plasma  cfDNA  concentration  increased  immediately  after  HI  eccentric  cycling  only  and 
344  returned  to  the  baseline  by  24  h  post-exercise,  however  the  lack  of  methylated  HOXD4 
345  indicated that this increase in cfDNA was not derived from skeletal muscle. No significant 
346  correlations were evident between either Hyp or cfDNA change and changes in muscle strength 
347  or  muscle  soreness.  Nevertheless,  the  magnitude  of  increase  in  cfDNA  was  significantly 
348  correlated  with  both  maximal  heart  rate  increase  and  rate  of  perceived  effort  during  the 
349  eccentric  cycling,  indicating  that  cfDNA  concentrations  in  the  blood  were  most  likely 
350  influenced by eccentric exercise intensity. 
351  Hyp is a non-proteinogenic amino acid and a major component of collagen, and its main 
352  function is to stabilize the collagen triple helix (Kotch et al. 2008). Therefore, concentration 
353  increases of this structural molecule in either blood or urine have been used as an indicator of 
354  muscle collagen breakdown (Murguia et al. 1988; Virtanen et al. 1993; Brown et al. 1997, 1999; 
16 
 

355  Tofas et al. 2008). For example, Brown et al. (1997) observed an increase (69%) in urine Hyp 
356  concentration at 2 days after 50 maximal eccentric knee extensions and subsequently concluded 
357  that the result indicated the breakdown of collagenous connective tissues. Additionally, Tofas 
358  et al. (2008) found that plasma Hyp concentration increased at 24 – 72 h, and peaked (80% 
359  increase) at 48 h after 200 plyometric jumps, indicating a strong effect on connective tissues. 
360  In contrast, Virtanen et al. (1993) did not detect a change in serum Hyp concentration for 96 h 
361  after 50 maximal concentric bilateral knee extensions, potentially indicating that non-damaging 
362  concentric  muscle  work  did  not  trigger  Hyp  release.  Bone  turnover  could  increase  Hyp 
363  concentrations  in  the  blood  after  exercise  (Maïmoun  et  al.  2006;  Kish  et  al.  2015),  thus 
364  increased  Hyp  concentration  in  the  blood  or  urine  does  not  exclusively  reflect  collagen 
365  breakdown originating from the muscle connective tissues of exercised muscles. However, 
366  since  gravity-induced  mechanical  impact  is  minimal  during  cycling  (Woodward  and 
367  Cunningham 1993), and the muscle force generated during  eccentric cycling protocol was not 
368  necessarily high in relation to maximal capacity, it seems likely that the origin of the increased 
369  Hyp in the blood was the connective tissue surrounding muscle fibers (endomysium), fascicle 
370  (perimysium) and/or muscle fascia (epimysium) rather than the bone. We hypothesized that 
371  increases in plasma Hyp concentration would be greater after HI than LI, since we observed 
372  higher DOMS values after HI than LI. Baseline Hyp values were higher than those in previous 
373  studies, however the magnitude of increase (40 – 53%) and time course of the changes were 
374  comparable to those reported in the previous studies (Brown et al. 1997; Tofas et al. 2008). It 
375  should be noted that the changes in plasma Hyp concentration were similar between HI and LI 
376  (Figure 2). Thus, eccentric exercise intensity does not appear to be a critical factor influencing 
377  muscle collagen breakdown, since the 4-fold intensity difference between the conditions was 
378  not  a  significant  factor  for  triggering  increased  collagen  breakdown.  Further  research  is 
379  warranted  to  examine  whether  increased  plasma  Hyp  concentration  indeed  represents 
17 
 

380  connective tissue damage, and if so why no significant difference between HI and LI was 
381  evident for the changes. 
382  Eccentric exercise-induced muscle damage increases muscle inflammation and release 
383  of matrix metalloproteinases (also known as matrix metallopeptidases), an enzyme family that 
384  degrades  collagen  and  other  extracellular  matrix  components,  and  triggers  the  subsequent 
385  phases of synthesis (Koskinen et al. 2002; Paulsen et al. 2010). The increase in plasma Hyp 
386  concentration observed in the current study at 24 – 72 h after the acute eccentric cycling session 
387  may  reflect  increased  collagen  turnover  via  metalloproteinases.  In  addition,  the  lack  of 
388  difference in plasma Hyp concentration responses between the two intensities (HI vs LI) may 
389  suggest  that  eccentric  exercise-induced  collagen  breakdown  is  dependent  upon  the  total 
390  mechanical work rather than exercise intensity, when the intensity is submaximal. However, 
391  this speculation requires further studies to assess which mechanical factor is mostly responsible 
392  for collagen breakdown after eccentric exercise, and if there is a difference when comparing 
393  mechanical  work-matched  submaximal  with  maximal  exercise  intensity  eccentric  cycling 
394  protocols for changes in plasma Hyp concentration.  
395  It was hypothesized that the post-exercise muscle functional loss and DOMS would be 
396  associated  with  collagen  breakdown.  However,  no  significant  correlations  between  the 
397  magnitude of increase in plasma Hyp concentration and either muscle functional loss or DOMS 
398  were evident (Figure 5). It is therefore unlikely that collagen breakdown is the direct cause of 
399  the muscle functional loss and DOMS after eccentric cycling, however we acknowledge the 
400  limitation that our muscle damage model involved the entire lower limb, whereas our muscle 
401  function measure was only in knee extensors. Crameri et al. (2007) showed that tenascin C, a 
402  protein responsible for extracellular matrix de-adhesion from the cell membranes, increased 
403  similarly after both voluntary and electrically-stimulated maximal eccentric exercise with a 
404  similar DOMS response in both conditions, even though the electrically-stimulated muscle 
18 
 

405  induced more pronounced muscle fiber damage. The authors concluded that an increase in 
406  tenascin C expression provides further evidence of a potential role of the extracellular matrix 
407  in  the  development  of  DOMS.  It  will  be  of  interest  to  determine  whether  plasma  Hyp 
408  concentration increases following a repeated bout of eccentric cycling that induces less DOMS 
409  and smaller changes in muscle function and other indirect markers of muscle damage. 
410  The present study was the first to examine changes in plasma cfDNA concentration 
411  following eccentric cycling, and revealed a 2-fold increase in plasma cfDNA concentration 
412  immediately  after  HI  but  not  LI  (Figure  3).  Increases  in  plasma  cfDNA  concentration 
413  immediately post-exercise have been reported  after many different exercises such as  half-
414  marathon (18.6-fold) (Atamaniuk et al. 2004), ultra-marathon (5.25-fold) (Atamaniuk et al. 
415  2008), weightlifting (3.15-fold) (Atamaniuk et al. 2010), exhaustive rowing (2.5-fold) (Velders 
416  et al. 2014), exhaustive stationary cycling (5.6-fold (Frühbeis et al. 2015), and 4.4-fold (Tug et 
417  al. 2017a)), high-intensity leg press exercise (1.62-fold) (Andreatta et al. 2018), repeated 40-m 
418  sprints with 1-min (1.9-fold) or 5-min (2.8-fold) inter-sprint rests (Haller et al. 2018), whole 
419  body resistance-training (1.6-fold) (Tug et al. 2017b), high-intensity interval treadmill running 
420  (~1.8-fold) (Ferrandi et al. 2018), and exhaustive treadmill running (2 – 15-fold) (Fatouros et 
421  al. 2010; Beiter et al. 2011, 2014; Tug et al. 2015; Helmig et al. 2015; Stawski et al. 2017; 
422  Haller et al. 2018). However, none of these studies clearly addressed whether eccentric muscle 
423  actions could trigger increases in cfDNA without concentric actions, significant fatigue, or 
424  exhaustion.  In  the  present  study,  we  observed  a  statisticaly  significant  increase  in  plasma 
425  cfDNA concentration; however, the magnitude of increase was smaller than that reported in 
426  many previous studies. This may indicate that metabolic demand is a key factor influencing 
427  cfDNA concentration as the metabolic demand of the eccentric cycling in the present study 
428  would have been far lower than that of the exercise in most previous studies. This hypothesis 
429  is  consistent  with  the  finding  of  a  significant  correlation  between  the  cfDNA  increase 
19 
 

430  immediately post-exercise and maximal change in heart rate during eccentric cycling, and the 
431  lack of statistical increase in plasma cfDNA after LI eccentric cycling. In fact, significant 
432  correlations  between  the  magnitude  of  increase  in  blood  cfDNA  concentration  and  blood 
433  lactate  levels,  perceived  exertion,  and  HR  have  been  reported  after  incremental  treadmill 
434  running (Beiter et al. 2011; Breitbach et al. 2014; Haller et al. 2017) and intermittent sprints of 
435  different  rest  periods  (Haller  et  al.  2018).  No  correlations  between  plasma  cfDNA 
436  concentration and muscle functional loss or DOMS were evident in the present study (Figure 
437  5), so it appears that post-exercise increases in blood cfDNA concentration are not strongly 
438  associated with muscle damage. It is of future interest to investigate plasma cfDNA responses 
439  to eccentric versus concentric cycling with the same metabolic demand (e.g., the same level of 
440  oxygen consumption). 
441  It should be noted that plasma cfDNA concentrations returned to the baseline at 24 h 
442  post-exercise. This has been observed in previous studies, with return to baseline occurring in 
443  as little as 30 – 120 min (Atamaniuk et al. 2004, 2008, 2010; Fatouros et al. 2010; Velders et 
444  al.  2014;  Andreatta  et  al.  2018).  A  possible  cause  of  this  rapid  decrease  could  be  the 
445  accompanying  increase  in  deoxyribonuclease-1  activity  in  healthy  individuals  in  order  to 
446  preserve  immune  homeostasis  (Velders  et  al.  2014;  Beiter  et  al.  2014,  2015).  Another 
447  interesting observation was that a relatively short exercise time (only 5 min of exercise, 9 min 
448  in total, including the resting periods) was needed to increase plasma cfDNA concentration in 
449  the present study. Beiter et al. (2011) reported an increase in plasma cfDNA concentration 
450  within 10 min after the onset of incremental treadmill running. In the present study, no blood 
451  samples were taken between the immediate post-exercise sample and at 24 h post-exercise, but 
452  based  on  previous  investigations  we  assumed  that  cfDNA  concentration  would  return  to 
453  baseline as soon as 120 min post-exercise (Atamaniuk et al. 2004, 2008, 2010; Fatouros et al. 
454  2010; Velders et al. 2014; Andreatta et al. 2018). 
20 
 

455  Regarding  the  origin  of  cfDNA,  damage  and  apoptosis  of skeletal  muscle  cells  or 
456  leukocytes have been previously considered to be candidate sources (Atamaniuk et al. 2008). 
457  The lack of methylated HOXD4 cfDNA in the plasma samples suggests that the increased 
458  cfDNA  did  not  originate  from  skeletal  muscle  (Figure  4).  Our  results  do  not  support  the 
459  hypothesis that post-exercise increase in cfDNA in the blood are derived from skeletal muscle 
460  cells undergoing apoptosis or necrosis (Atamaniuk et al. 2004, 2010; Ferrandi et al. 2018). 
461  Moreover,  based  on  our  findings  it  seems  unlikely  that  there  was  DNA  ‘leakage’  from 
462  exercised  muscle  cells  due  to  increased  membrane  permeability  or  increased  release  of 
463  extracellular vesicles (Helmig et al. 2015), or that there was an increased rate of clearance of 
464  DNA fragments originating from muscle cells that stuck on cell membranes or lymph due to 
465  increased blood perfusion (Breitbach et al. 2012). Instead, one plausible explanation is that 
466  both  baseline  and  post-exercise  levels  of  cfDNA  largely  originated  from  haematopoietic-
467  derived  cells,  as  reported  in  a  previous  study  (Tug  et  al.  2015).  Even  though  the  precise 
468  physiological event that causes the increase in plasma cfDNA concentration is not yet fully 
469  understood, Beiter et al. (2014) speculated that activated neutrophils might primarily contribute 
470  to  exercise-evoked  cfDNA  levels  by  releasing  neutrophil  extracellular  traps.  Neutrophils 
471  respond to exercise by forming neutrophil extracellular traps which is thought to contribute to 
472  an  increased  hypercoagulable  exercise-induced  state  (Beiter  et  al.  2015).  Future  research 
473  should examine the source of the exercise-induced increases in plasma cfDNA concentration. 
474    Based on the findings from the present study, it appears that plasma Hyp concentration 
475  increases after eccentric cycling possibly as a result of collagen breakdown, but the increase 
476  was not associated with decreases in muscle function or DOMS. Plasma cfDNA concentration 
477  does not appear to be a marker of muscle damage, as there was no detectable methylation of 
478  HOXD4 in the cfDNA molecules, and the cfDNA concentration increase after exercise seemed 
21 
 

479  to be more associated with the metabolic intensity of the exercise (i.e. heart rate increase and 
480  perceived effort). 
481   
482  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
483  The authors thank all the study participants for their assistance with the study. We are thankful 
484  to Dr Gina Ravenscroft and Dr Hayley Goullee for providing the primary human myoblast line 
485  used as positive control. 
486   
487  DECLARATION OF INTEREST 
488  Competing interests: The authors declare there are no competing interests. 
489   
490  AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS 
491  GM,  AB  and  KN  conceived  and  designed  the  study,  and  GM  and  LC  conducted  the 
492  experiments. GM collected, and GM, OB, WP, LC, MM, TK, and EG analyzed the data. GM 
493  drafted the manuscript with AB and KN. All authors read, edited and approved the manuscript. 
494   
495  FUNDING DETAILS 
496  This study was funded by an Intra-School Collaboration Seed Fund from the School of Medical 
497  and Health Sciences at Edith Cowan University. GM has received financial support through a 
498  scholarship from the Australian Government Research Training Program. EG is supported by 
499  fellowships from Cancer Council Western Australia (CCWA). 
500     
22 
 

501  REFERENCES 
502  Andreatta MV, Curty VM, Coutinho JVS, et al (2018) Cell-free DNA as an earlier predictor of 
503  exercise-induced  performance  decrement  related  to  muscle  damage.  Int  J  Sports 
504  Physiol Perform 13:953–956. https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2017-0421 
505  Atamaniuk J, Stuhlmeier KM, Vidotto C, et al (2008) Effects of ultra-marathon on circulating 
506  DNA and mRNA expression of pro- and anti-apoptotic genes in mononuclear cells. Eur 
507  J Appl Physiol 104:711–717. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-008-0827-2 
508  Atamaniuk  J,  Vidotto  C,  Kinzlbauer  M,  et  al  (2010)  Cell-free  plasma  DNA  and  purine 
509  nucleotide degradation markers following weightlifting exercise. Eur J Appl Physiol 
510  110:695–701. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-010-1532-5 
511  Atamaniuk J, Vidotto C, Tschan H, et al (2004) Increased concentrations of cell-free plasma 
512  DNA  after  exhaustive  exercise.  Clin  Chem  50:1668–1670. 
513  https://doi.org/10.1373/clinchem.2004.034553 
514  Beiter T, Fragasso A, Hartl D, Nieß AM (2015) Neutrophil extracellular traps: a walk on the 
515  wild  side  of  exercise  immunology.  Sports  Med  45:625–640. 
516  https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-014-0296-1 
517  Beiter T, Fragasso A, Hudemann J, et al (2014) Neutrophils release extracellular DNA traps in 
518  response  to  exercise.  J  Appl  Physiol  117:325–333. 
519  https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00173.2014 
520  Beiter T, Fragasso A, Hudemann J, et al (2011) Short-term treadmill running as a model for 
521  studying  cell-free  DNA  kinetics  in  vivo.  Clin  Chem  57:633–636. 
522  https://doi.org/10.1373/clinchem.2010.158030 
523  Borg G (1998) Borg’s perceived exertion and pain scales. Human Kinetics, Champaign, IL 
524  Breitbach S, Sterzing B, Magallanes C, et al (2014) Direct measurement of cell-free DNA from 
525  serially  collected  capillary  plasma  during  incremental  exercise.  J  Appl  Physiol 
526  117:119–130. https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.00002.2014 
527  Breitbach  S,  Tug  S,  Simon  P  (2012)  Circulating  cell-free  DNA:  an  up-coming  molecular 
528  marker  in  exercise  physiology.  Sports  Med  42:565–586. 
529  https://doi.org/10.2165/11631380-000000000-00000 
530  Brown S, Day S, Donnelly A (1999) Indirect evidence of human skeletal muscle damage and 
531  collagen  breakdown  after  eccentric  muscle  actions.  J  Sports  Sci  17:397–402. 
532  https://doi.org/10.1080/026404199365911 
533  Brown SJ, Child RB, Day SH, Donnelly AE (1997) Indices of skeletal muscle damage and 
534  connective  tissue  breakdown  following  eccentric  muscle  contractions.  Eur  J  Appl 
535  Physiol Occup Physiol 75:369–374. https://doi.org/10.1007/s004210050174 
536  Clarkson  PM,  Nosaka  K,  Braun  B  (1992)  Muscle  function  after  exercise-induced  muscle 
537  damage  and  rapid  adaptation.  Med  Sci  Sports  Exerc  24:512–520. 
538  https://doi.org/10.1249/00005768-199205000-00004 
23 
 

539  Crameri RM, Aagaard P, Qvortrup K, et al (2007) Myofibre damage in human skeletal muscle: 
540  effects of electrical stimulation versus voluntary contraction. J Physiol 583:365–380. 
541  https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.2007.128827 
542  Ehrlich M, Lacey M (2013) DNA methylation and differentiation: silencing, upregulation and 
543  modulation  of  gene  expression.  Epigenomics  5:553–568. 
544  https://doi.org/10.2217/epi.13.43 
545  Fatouros  IG,  Jamurtas  AZ,  Nikolaidis  MG,  et  al  (2010)  Time  of  sampling  is  crucial  for 
546  measurement of cell-free plasma DNA following acute aseptic inflammation induced 
547  by  exercise.  Clin  Biochem  43:1368–1370. 
548  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2010.08.020 
549  Ferrandi PJ, Fico BG, Whitehurst M, et al (2018) Acute high-intensity interval exercise induces 
550  comparable levels of circulating cell-free DNA and Interleukin-6 in obese and normal-
551  weight individuals. Life Sci 202:161–166. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lfs.2018.04.007 
552  Frühbeis C, Helmig S, Tug S, et al (2015) Physical exercise induces rapid release of small 
553  extracellular  vesicles  into  the  circulation.  J  Extracell  Vesicles  4:28239. 
554  https://doi.org/10.3402/jev.v4.28239 
555  Grounds MD, Sorokin L, White J (2005) Strength at the extracellular matrix-muscle interface. 
556  Scand  J  Med  Sci  Sports  15:381–391.  https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1600-
557  0838.2005.00467.x 
558  Haller N, Helmig S, Taenny P, et al (2018) Circulating, cell-free DNA as a marker for exercise 
559  load  in  intermittent  sports.  PLoS  One  13:e0191915. 
560  https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0191915 
561  Haller N, Tug S, Breitbach S, et al (2017) Increases in circulating cell-free DNA during aerobic 
562  running depend on intensity and duration. Int J Sports Physiol Perform 12:455–462. 
563  https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2015-0540 
564  Helmig S, Frühbeis C, Krämer-Albers E-M, et al (2015) Release of bulk cell free DNA during 
565  physical  exercise  occurs  independent  of  extracellular  vesicles.  Eur  J  Appl  Physiol 
566  115:2271–2280. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-015-3207-8 
567  Julian V, Thivel D, Costes F, et al (2018) Eccentric training improves body composition by 
568  inducing mechanical and metabolic adaptations: a promising approach for overweight 
569  and obese individuals. Front Physiol 9:. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2018.01013 
570  Kish K, Mezil Y, Ward WE, et al (2015) Effects of plyometric exercise session on markers of 
571  bone  turnover  in  boys  and  young  men.  Eur  J  Appl  Physiol  115:2115–2124. 
572  https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-015-3191-z 
573  Koskinen  SOA,  Ahtikoski  AM,  Komulainen  J,  et  al  (2002)  Short-term  effects  of  forced 
574  eccentric contractions on collagen synthesis and degradation in rat skeletal muscle. 
575  Pflügers Arch 444:59–72. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00424-002-0792-2 
576  Kotch  FW,  Guzei  IA,  Raines  RT  (2008)  Stabilization  of  the  collagen  triple  helix  by  o-
577  methylation  of  hydroxyproline  residues.  J  Am  Chem  Soc  130:2952–2953. 
578  https://doi.org/10.1021/ja800225k 
24 
 

579  LaStayo PC, Pierotti DJ, Pifer J, et al (2000) Eccentric ergometry: increases in locomotor 
580  muscle size and strength at low training intensities. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp 
581  Physiol 278:R1282-1288. https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpregu.2000.278.5.R1282 
582  Maïmoun L, Manetta J, Couret I, et al (2006) The intensity level of physical exercise and the 
583  bone metabolism response. Int J Sports Med 27:105–111. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-
584  2005-837621 
585  Mavropalias G, Koeda T, Barley OR, et al (2020) Comparison between high- and low-intensity 
586  eccentric cycling of equal mechanical work for muscle damage and the repeated bout 
587  effect. Eur J Appl Physiol 120:1015–1025. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00421-020-04341-
588  5 
589  Murguia  MJ,  Vailas  A,  Mandelbaum  B,  et  al  (1988)  Elevated  plasma  hydroxyproline.  A 
590  possible risk factor associated with connective tissue injuries during overuse. Am J 
591  Sports Med 16:660–664. https://doi.org/10.1177/036354658801600619 
592  Paschalis V, Koutedakis Y, Jamurtas AZ, et al (2005) Equal volumes of high and low intensity 
593  of eccentric exercise in relation to muscle damage and performance. J Strength Cond 
594  Res 19:184–188. https://doi.org/10.1519/R-14763.1 
595  Paulsen G, Crameri R, Benestad HB, et al (2010) Time course of leukocyte accumulation in 
596  human  muscle  after  eccentric  exercise.  Med  Sci  Sports  Exerc  42:75–85. 
597  https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181ac7adb 
598  Peñailillo L, Blazevich A, Numazawa H, Nosaka K (2013) Metabolic and muscle damage 
599  profiles  of  concentric  versus  repeated  eccentric  cycling.  Med  Sci  Sports  Exerc 
600  45:1773–1781. https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0b013e31828f8a73 
601  Peñailillo L, Mackay K, Abbiss CR (2018) Rating of perceived exertion during concentric and 
602  eccentric cycling: are we measuring effort or exertion? Int J Sports Physiol Perform 
603  13:517–523. https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2017-0171 
604  Stawski R, Walczak K, Kosielski P, et al (2017) Repeated bouts of exhaustive exercise increase 
605  circulating cell free nuclear and mitochondrial DNA without development of tolerance 
606  in healthy men. PLoS One 12:e0178216. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0178216 
607  Tofas T, Jamurtas AZ, Fatouros I, et al (2008) Plyometric exercise increases serum indices of 
608  muscle  damage  and  collagen  breakdown.  J  Strength  Cond  Res  22:490–496. 
609  https://doi.org/10.1519/JSC.0b013e31816605a0 
610  Tug S, Helmig S, Deichmann ER, et al (2015) Exercise-induced increases in cell free DNA in 
611  human plasma originate predominantly from cells of the haematopoietic lineage. Exerc 
612  Immunol Rev 21:164–173 
613  Tug  S,  Mehdorn  M,  Helmig  S,  et  al  (2017a)  Exploring  the  potential  of  cell-free-DNA 
614  measurements after an exhaustive cycle-ergometer test as a marker for performance-
615  related  parameters.  Int  J  Sports  Physiol  Perform  12:597–604. 
616  https://doi.org/10.1123/ijspp.2016-0157 
25 
 

617  Tug S, Tross A-K, Hegen P, et al (2017b) Acute effects of strength exercises and effects of 
618  regular strength training on cell free DNA concentrations in blood plasma. PLoS ONE 
619  12:e0184668. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0184668 
620  Velders  M,  Treff  G,  Machus  K,  et  al  (2014) Exercise  is  a  potent  stimulus  for  enhancing 
621  circulating  DNase  activity.  Clin  Biochem  47:471–474. 
622  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2013.12.017 
623  Virtanen P, Viitasalo JT, Vuori J, et al (1993) Effect of concentric exercise on serum muscle 
624  and  collagen  markers.  J  Appl  Physiol  75:1272–1277. 
625  https://doi.org/10.1152/jappl.1993.75.3.1272 
626  Wobbrock  JO,  Findlater  L,  Gergle  D,  Higgins  JJ  (2011)  The  aligned  rank  transform  for 
627  nonparametric factorial analyses using only ANOVA procedures. In: CHI 2011 - 29th 
628  Annual  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems,  Conference 
629  Proceedings and Extended Abstracts. Vancouver, BC, Canada, pp 143–146 
630  Woodward  MI,  Cunningham  JL  (1993)  Skeletal  accelerations  measured  during  different 
631  exercises.  Proc  Inst  Mech  Eng  H  207:79–85. 
632  https://doi.org/10.1243/PIME_PROC_1993_207_274_02 
633   
634     
26 
 

635  FIGURE LEGENDS 
636   
637  Figure 1. Changes (mean ± SD) in maximal voluntary isometric contraction (MVIC) torque at 
638  70° and 20° knee flexion (average of the two angles) [A], and muscle soreness (average value 
639  reported during sitting up and down from a chair) [B], before (Pre), immediately after (Post), 
640  and 24 – 72 h after higher-intensity (HI) and lower-intensity (LI) eccentric cycling.  
641  *: significant (P < 0.05) difference from the baseline for both groups. #: significant (P < 0.05) 
642  difference between groups. ANOVA results for interaction (group × time) effect are shown in 
643  the legend for each group. 
644   
645  Figure 2. Changes (mean ± SD) in plasma hydroxyproline concentration before (Pre), 24, 48 
646  and 72 h after higher- (HI) and lower-intensity (LI) eccentric cycling.  
647  *: significant (P < 0.05) difference from the baseline for both groups, n.s.: no significant group 
648  × time interaction effect. 
649   
650  Figure 3. Changes (mean ± SD) in plasma cfDNA concentration before (Pre), immediately 
651  after (Post), and 24, 48 and 72 h after higher-intensity (HI) and lower-intensity (LI) eccentric 
652  cycling.  
653  †: significant (P < 0.001) difference of the HI group from the baseline value. #: significant (P 
654  < 0.05) difference between groups. P = 0.02 shows the group × time interaction effect. 
655   
656  Figure 4. HOXD4 methylation analysis in positive control (100 and 0% methylated PCR gDNA 
657  controls in 50:50 ratio) [A], primary human myoblast cell line [B], gDNA [C] and supernatant 
658  cfDNA [D] of uveal melanoma cell line Mel270 (negative control), composite data from the 
659  five  participants  before  [E]  and  immediately  after  [F]  higher-intensity  eccentric  cycling. 
660  Diagram denotes fluorescence signal intensity (amplitude) of droplets containing methylated 
661  (Channel 1, FAM) and unmethylated (Channel 2, HEX) HOXD4 DNA copies respectively. 
662  Pink lines denote assay thresholds, gray dots show empty droplets, green dots are HOXD4 
663  unmethylated DNA, and blue dots are HOXD4 methylated DNA. 
664   
665  Figure 5. Correlations between the largest percent decrease in maximal voluntary isometric 
666  contraction  (MVIC)  torque  at  24  –  72  h  post-exercise  and  maximal  increase  in  plasma 
667  hydroxyproline  concentration  (Hyp)  [A],  maximal  muscle  soreness  scores  and  maximal 
668  increase in plasma Hyp [B], rate of perceived effort (RPE) and maximal increase in Hyp [C], 
669  maximal change in plasma creatine kinase (CK) activity and fold-change in plasma cell-free 
670  DNA (cfDNA) concentration from pre- to immediately post-exercise [D], maximal increase in 
671  heart  rate  (%  change  from  rest)  during  exercise  and  fold-change  in  plasma  cfDNA 
672  concentration from pre- to immediately post-exercise [E], and RPE and fold-change in plasma 
673  cfDNA concentration from pre- to immediately post-exercise [F]. Black (⚫) and white (⚪) 
674  circles represent the participants in the higher-intensity (HI) and lower-intensity (LI) eccentric 
675  cycling    groups,  respectively.  Statistics  for  Pearson  product  moment  (r),  and  Spearman 
676  correlation  (ρ)  and  their  respective  P  values  are  reported  within  each  graph.  Dotted  lines 
677  demonstrate 95% CIs for the linear regression line. 
678     
27 
 

679  Figures 
680  Figure 1 
681   
682     
28 
 

683  Figure 2 
684   
685     
29 
 

686  Figure 3 
687   
688     
30 
 

689  Figure 4 
690   
691     
31 
 

692  Figure 5 
693   
32 
 