Real time cosmology - A direct measure of the
expansion rate of the Universe
5102 naJ 51  ]OC.hp-ortsa[  1v22830.1051:viXra
Hans-Rainer Klöckner∗
Max-Planck-Institut für Radioastronomie (MPIfR), Germany
E-mail: hrk@mpifr-bonn.mpg.de
Danail Obreschkow
The University of Western Australia, ICRAR, Australia
E-mail: danail.obreschkow@icrar.org
Carlos Martins
Centro de Astrofísica da Universidade do Porto, Portugal
E-mail: Carlos.Martins@astro.up.pt
Alvise Raccanelli
Department of Physics & Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, Caltech, & JPL, USA
E-mail: alvise@caltech.edu
David Champion
Max-Planck-Institut für Radioastronomie (MPIfR), Germany
E-mail: champion@mpifr-bonn.mpg.de
Alan Roy
Max-Planck-Institut für Radioastronomie (MPIfR), Germany
E-mail: aroy@mpifr-bonn.mpg.de
Andrei Lobanov
Max-Planck-Institut für Radioastronomie (MPIfR), Germany
E-mail: alobanov@mpifr-bonn.mpg.de
Jan Wagner
Max-Planck-Institut für Radioastronomie (MPIfR), Germany & KASI KVN, Korea
E-mail: jwagner@mpifr-bonn.mpg.de, jan.wagner@iki.fi
Reinhard Keller
Max-Planck-Institut für Radioastronomie (MPIfR), Germany
E-mail: rkeller@mpifr-bonn.mpg.de
(cid:13)c Copyrightownedbytheauthor(s)underthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlikeLicence. http://pos.sissa.it/

| 0   | 1   |
|:----|:----|
|     |     |

In recent years cosmology has undergone a revolution, with precise measurements of the mi-
crowave background radiation, large galaxy redshift surveys, and the discovery of the recent ac-
celerated expansion of the Universe using observations of distant supernovae. All these ground-
breaking observations have boosted our understanding of the Cosmos and its evolution. Because
of this detailed understanding, more detailed tests of cosmological models require unprecedented
precision that is only available with the next generation of astronomical observatories. Radio ob-
servations in particular will be able to access more independent modes than optical, infrared or
X-ray facility and will show very different systematics compared to these other wavebands.
In this light, the SKA enables us to do an ultimate test in cosmology by measuring the expansion
rate of the Universe in real time. This can be done by a rather simple experiment of observing
the neutral hydrogen (HI) signal of galaxies at two different epochs. The signal will encounter
a change in frequency imprinted as the Universe expands over time and thus monitoring the
drift in frequencies will provide a real time measure of the cosmic acceleration. Over a period
of 12 years one would expected a frequency shift of the order of 0.1 Hz assuming a standard
ΛCDM cosmology. However, monitoring such changes would require some modifications to
the current baseline design of the SKA. In particular, the design needs to be adapted to achieve
higher spectral resolution, at least within sub-bands (strong requirement), and to allow for a well
monitored distribution of the local oscillator signal, preferably at milli-Hz accuracy over a period
of 12 years (weaker requirement, which could be circumvented by pulsar observations). Based on
thesensitivityestimatesoftheSKAandthenumbercountsoftheexpectedHIgalaxies, itisshown
that the number counts are sufficiently high to compensate for the observational uncertainties of
the measurements and hence allow a statistical detection of the frequency shift. In addition,
depending on the observational setup, it is shown that the evolution of the frequency shift in
redshift space can be estimated to a precision of a percent.
Although technically challenging, real time cosmology will be possible with the SKA due to its
superior survey capabilities and the ability to measure Milk-Way type galaxies up to redshifts
of unity. The direct measurement of the frequency shift and hence the cosmic acceleration can
provide a model independent confirmation of dark energy. At highest precision it can distinguish
between some competing cosmological models and combined with probes at other wavelength
can break degeneracies and improving the figure of merit of cosmological parameters.
Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array
June 8-13, 2014
Giardini Naxos, Italy
∗Speaker.
(cid:13)c Copyrightownedbytheauthor(s)underthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlikeLicence.

| 0   | 1   |
|:----|:----|
|     |     |

Real time cosmology - A direct measure of the expansion rate of the Universe Hans-Rainer Klöckner
1. Introduction
The Big Bang concept of our Universe is well established as “the standard model of cosmol-
ogy”, but currently the observational data cannot tighten constrains on the physics at work at the
very earliest phase in its evolution. In this picture, shortly after the big bang, 13.8 billion years
ago, the Universe was dominated by an energy field with negative pressure that drove a period of
accelerated expansion, “the inflation” phase. Since then the Universe has expanded, cooled down,
and changed from a radiation- to a matter-dominated composition. If its content is dominated by
a composition of baryonic and cold dark matter one would expect a decelerated expansion of the
Universe. However by using type Ia supernovae (SNIa), as standard candles, a surprising discovery
has been made, that the expansion of the Universe is undergoing a second epoch of acceleration
(Riess et al. 1998, Perlmutter et al. 1999, this research was awarded a the Nobel prize in physics
2011). The reason for this recent accelerated expansion is still a mystery and points to an addi-
tional phase of negative pressure contribution of the mass-energy field and a possible modification
of Einstein’s general relativity. Thus measuring the recent acceleration will provide an additional
route to probe the equation of state and the interplay of dark energy.
Techniques to measure expansion rates in the Universe were already explored in 1962 by Sandage
(Sandage 1962), but the technological limitations at these time kept these measurements out of
reach. It took more than 30 years for this idea to be revisited and Loeb proposed 1998 to use
Lyman-alpha forest absorption lines toward quasars for this measurement. The author concluded
that the signal might be marginally detectable with a 10-m class telescope (Loeb 1998). Now with
the E-ELT, a 40-m class telescope, to be built in the near future it seems possible to perform the
“Loeb’ test” with a specially designed spectrograph (for more information on the CODEX1-like
experiments see e.g. Pasquini et al. 2005; Liske et al. 2008a, Liske et al. 2008b, Maiolino et al.
2013). Unfortunately this test is greatly affected by the cut-off restriction of ground based obser-
vations introduced by the atmosphere. Due to this cut-off, Lyman-alpha photons can only trace
redshifts (z≥1.65) at which most of the cosmological models describe the expansion rate of the
Universe by deceleration only. SKA observations in contrast, of the neutral hydrogen (HI) signals
of Milky Way-type galaxies up to redshifts of unity, are not greatly affected by the atmosphere or
ionosphere. This redshift regime is the one at which most of the “nearby” acceleration takes place
and therefore is the most promising to investigate the influence of dark energy in the Universe.
The real time measurements of the cosmic acceleration its a very appealing experiment that promises
a model independent confirmation of dark energy and a test to distinguish between cosmological
models. Despite the technical challenges this experiment may face, is there a feasible SKA experi-
ment in the radio regime that could measure the frequency shift caused by the evolving Universe?
2. The basic experiment
The basic experiment is to detect the changes over time of properties of individual galaxies caused
by the expansion of the Universe. Generally various observables could be used to constrain the pa-
rameters needed to describe the expansion history of the Universe which are the source brightness,
1“Cosmic Dynamics Experiment”
2

Real time cosmology - A direct measure of the expansion rate of the Universe Hans-Rainer Klöckner
Figure 1: The expected redshift drift introduced by the cosmic acceleration against the redshift regime cov-
ered by the SKA. The redshift drift in 12years is shown as a change in frequency of the neutral hydrogen
signal for various ΛCDM cosmologies (Ω =0.27; Ω =0.0, WMAP, Planck, 1). The characteristic fre-
m Λ
quency shift shows a maximun shift of about 0.1 Hz, this translates into dz/dt ∼ 10−10 or ∼3 cm in redshift-
and velocity-space, respectively. The coloured background indicates the frequency regimes of band 1 and 2
of the SKA basic design that are used to measure neutral hydrogen signals from galaxies (350 – 1050 MHz,
950 MHz – HI rest frame frequency).
the apparent angular size, the cosmic parallax, or the redshift (see e.g. Gudmundsson & Björnsson
2002, Quercellini et al. 2012). However to measure the changes of the first three observables seem
to be out of reach to the current technical capabilities of the SKA. But it seems feasible for the SKA
to trace the change of redshifts of individual galaxies and, compared to the CODEX-like experi-
ment, a different approach is envisaged to measure the cosmic acceleration. The basic experiment
would make use of the fast survey capabilities and the sensitivity to observe a billion of HI galaxies
up to redshift 1. Based on two HI surveys the task is to combine the individual HI-line signals of
a galaxy and statistically merge up to a billion of these measurements. The high number counts of
galaxies will compensate the uncertainties of the measurements and therefore permit a statistical
detection of the redshift drift (the initial setup of the experiment has been described in Klöckner
2012).
The redshift measurements are in general independent of a cosmological model and rely only on the
knowledge of the rest frame frequency and the assumption that the fundamental constants do not
change over the evolution of the Universe (Kanekar 2012). In a theoretical framework the change
of redshifts can be described by z˙ = H(z)−(1+z)H and the fraction H(z)/H is used to relate
0 0
3

Real time cosmology - A direct measure of the expansion rate of the Universe Hans-Rainer Klöckner
the acceleration to different kinds of cosmological models. Therefore measuring the redshift drift
at various redshifts provides a unique test of different cosmologies (Balbi & Quercellini 2007). In
the following a ΛCDM cosmology is assumed and the Hubble parameter is described as
H(z) = H 0[Ω ×(1+z)3 +Ω +Ω k(1+z)2]1 2, (2.1)
m λ
with Ω = 1−(Ω +Ω ). Note that the first equation has been written in such a way that the
k m λ
acceleration is positive (v˙ > 0) and the deceleration is negative (v˙ < 0) defined in the velocity
frame. Figure 1 displays the expected frequency shift at different redshifts for various values of
the cosmological parameter, Ω , and a fixed Ω of 0.27. Depending on Ω an acceleration of
λ m λ
the Universe is expected up to redshifts of 3 (positive frequency shift), after this the expansion
of the Cosmos will slow down (decelerate, negative frequency shift). Furthermore, depending on
Ω the frequency shift shows a distinct relationship with redshift and a pronounced signature with
λ
a maximum at 0.4 and 0.6 in redshift. In the case of the cosmological parameter measured by
the WMAP and Planck mission (Hinshaw et al. 2013, Planck Collaboration 2013) a maximum
frequency shift of 0.1 Hz can be expected after an observing period of 12 years.
The direct measurement of the frequency shift and the capability to distinguish between com-
peting cosmological models requires a precisions of up to a few percent (e.g. 1% = 0.001 Hz). In
order to reach this kind of accuracy the main task of this experiment is to utilise the HI line signals
of a galaxy at 2 epochs and statistically combine up to a billion of these measurements. In this light
the feasibility of this experiment depends on the projected sensitivity estimates and the number
counts of HI galaxies up to cosmological redshifts. The expected number counts and the properties
of individual HI galaxies are based on the SAX-SKA sky simulation (Obreschkow et al. 2009) and
the image sensitivity can be determined via the following equations (see e.g. Klöckner et al. 2009):
SEFD
∆I = √ , (2.2)
η t∆ν
s
with η = 0.9 is the system efficiency, t integration time [s], and ∆ν is the channel width or band-
s
width [Hz]. The system equivalent flux density (SEFD) is determined via
2kT
sys
SEFD = , (2.3)
A
eff
where T is the system temperature [K], k is the Boltzmann constant, A is the effective collect-
sys eff
ing area [m2].
In order to investigate if the SKA is capable of detecting the global signal of the redshift drift
shown in Figure 1 a generic observational setup is assumed. The experiment would based on two-
“all-sky” HI surveys with the following system parameters: SKA (A / T = 13.000 m2 K−1), 1
eff sys
hour integration per pointing, 20 sq. degrees field of view, survey coverage of 30.000 sq. degrees.
This setup will result in a sensitivity of about 45 µJy for the system channel width of 3.9 kHz
and 28 mJy for 0.01 Hz wide channels (10% accuracy). Based on the sensitivity limit of 45 µJy
the expected number count of HI galaxies in the redshift range z = 0.2-1 is of the order of 107
sources (#N). To derive the frequency shift from the observed HI line spectra of two epochs two
4

Real time cosmology - A direct measure of the expansion rate of the Universe Hans-Rainer Klöckner
approaches can be applied. Either combining the cross-correlation spectrum of each source or
fitting signal components to line spectra and determine their statistical means.
In the first case one would use the high-resolution spectra of the two epochs and stack the
power spectrum of the cross-correlation spectra of all galaxies. Assuming that the noise properties
of these spectra are independent, the noise of the resulting averaged power-spectrum will drop as
√
∼ 1/ #N to 2.8 µJy and therefore allowing the detection of the global signal of the redshift drift
at a significance of ∼ 15σ.
In the second case one would use the low-resolution spectra and determine the line properties
by fitting a analytic function to the line profile (e.g. using a busy function Westmeier et al. 2013).
In this way one assumes that all the observational parameters (the space velocity vector of the
observatory) can be modeled with such precision that the residual data do not show any systematic
effects above millimeter accuracy. The difference of the modelled centre frequencies determines
√
the cosmic signal and its uncertainty will drop with ∼ 1/ #N. Reversing the arguments, based
on the assumption that the uncertainties need to match some fraction of cms−1, this experiment is
only possible if the redshifts or the velocities of 107 galaxies can be estimated at the observatory to
a precision of 10 ms−1.
Based on the generic observational setup both methods indicates that in general the SKA would be
capable to measure the global signal of the redshift drift.
3. A feasible experiment with the SKA
Tracing the signature of the cosmic acceleration at various redshifts would be the ultimate exper-
iment to test cosmological models. In the case of a ΛCDM cosmology the redshift drift shown
in Figure 1 indicates a characteristic feature up to redshift of unity. The anticipated system per-
formance of the SKA is an ideal match to one of the key requirements of this experiment. In
particular the sensitivity figures of the SKA will be optimised to trace the HI line (in emission)
of Milky Way-like galaxies up to a redshift of unity and therefore will produce the most complete
HI/redshift surveys in this redshift range.
The main aim of this experiment is to measure a shift in frequency of about 0.1 Hz over a period of
about 12 years (2.9 cms−1 in velocity space and 10−10 in redshift space). However these measure-
ments may suffer from various systematic effects influencing the accuracy of the experiment. The
potential contributions to the uncertainties of the redshift drift can be grouped as follows: (a) The
probe of the redshift drift at cosmological distances show intrinsic variations. (b) The model of
the Earth position in space and the observatory is insufficient for the accuracy needed. (c) The
technical hardware of the observatory.
Case (a): Probing redshifts via the neutral hydrogen signal seems to be one of the most promis-
ing probes in the radio regime, even if our current knowledge of HI selected galaxies is limited up
to redshifts of 0.2. Generally these galaxies do not show any evidence for clustering or a preference
to populate over-dense regions in the Universe and hence their redshift estimates are less affected
than optically selected galaxies (Papastergis et al. 2013; Klöckner & Romano-Diaz in prep.). The
contribution of the peculiar motion to the apparent redshift has been estimated using the SAX-
SKA- and the millenium-simulations (Obreschkow et al. 2009, De Lucia & Blaizot 2007). For the
individual galaxies, with redshifts larger than z=0.2, the peculiar motion in redshift space has been
5

Real time cosmology - A direct measure of the expansion rate of the Universe Hans-Rainer Klöckner
estimated to d(z+z )/dt ∼ 10−14. This effect is a factor 10 smaller than the cosmological signal
pec
at percent level and can be neglected in the future.
Case (b): The most challenging step in observing an extragalactic redshift at the needed pre-
cision is to relate this measurement to an accurate reference system in time and celestial direction
(e.g. Barycentre see Lindegren & Dravins 2003). Furthermore, the astrometry, the time standard,
and the pointing accuracy can influence the modelling of the line-of-sight doppler shift contribution
of the observatory. To match the precision requirements of the redshift-drift estimates the pointing
accuracy need to be of the order of 1 arcsec. The accuracy in astrometry and the distribution of the
time standard is related to the accuracy of the correlator model, including an Earth model and the
JPL ephemeris. However changes in the position of the observatory e.g. due to tides (Solid-Earth:
30 cm, B. Campbell private comm.), ocean- or atmospheric-loading (2 cm, B. Campbell private
comm.) etc. need to be taken into account in the post-processing of the full-sky survey.
Case (c): The major technical challenge to overcome is the constraint on the long time sta-
bility of the SKA system. The key is to reduce or handle systematic effects of the observatory in
timing precision and frequency stability. Such requirements are difficult to evaluate and need to
be assessed in more detail in future discussions. Nevertheless, it is assumed that pulsar observa-
tions will be used to monitor the long time stability of the system. These observations are sensitive
enough to detect systematic effects within the observatory like time drifts or global changes of the
observatory’s 3-d velocity vector in the JPL ephemeris. Modelling of the arrival time of the pulse
of a network of pulsars should enable us to correct for such systematics effects (Champion et al.
2010, Hobbs et al. 2012).
An additional technical limitation is the number of correlator channels in order to fully trace
the neutral hydrogen signal of galaxy. Generally the signal properties of the HI emission depends
on the rotational velocity and the inclination of the galaxy. Assuming that the majority of the
surveyed galaxies are Milky Way-type galaxies with a rotational velocity of 300 kms−1 a spectral
window of 500 kms−1 would be sufficient to trace the entire signal. Tracing such a spectral window
with the precision needed to estimate the redshift drift ∼108−9 correlator channels are needed. Such
a high number of channels could be realised by a dedicated pipeline, streaming the data from the
predefined spectral window into a software correlator. The setup of the spectral windows and how
the observations would be organised to set the frequency standard needs to be investigated in the
future.
3.1 The experiments
In order to investigate the feasibility of tracing the signature of cosmic acceleration at various
redshifts two approaches with low- and high-spectral resolution datasets are discussed.
In case of low-spectral resolution datasets and an observing precision of 10 ms−1, the main
constraint is to measure redshifts of ∼ 107 galaxies per redshift interval. In general these high
number counts can be achieved using an integration time of about 6 hours per pointing, assuming
the same observational setup as used in the following discussion for the high-spectral-resolution
case. The survey time for this experiment would be of the order of one year with a 10% precision
on the redshift drift measurement. In order to archive higher precision the observing precision and
hence the channel resolution in frequency space needs to be adapted.
6

Real time cosmology - A direct measure of the expansion rate of the Universe Hans-Rainer Klöckner
Figure 2: The basic ingredient of this experiment is the high number counts of galaxies and the sensitivity.
The figures show the number counts and the significance per channel precision of detection versus redshift.
The top panel show the results for a hypothetical SKA with increased channel resolutions and the bottom
1
displays the results for the full SKA.
In the following the feasibility of this experiment is explored by high-spectral resolution
datasets (∆ν = 0.001,0.002,0.005,0.01 Hz). This discussion will address both phases of the SKA,
the SKA and a SKA with hypothetically channel width of this order.
1
SKA Phase 1 (SKA )
1
For the SKA a generic observational setup is assumed with the following system parameters:
1
SKA (A / T = 1300 m2 K−1), various channel resolutions, 12 hours integration per pointing,
1 eff sys
1 sq. degrees field of view, survey coverage of 30000 sq. degrees. The results are shown in the
top panels of Figure 2. The results indicate that the number counts would be sufficient to detect
a redshift drift at redshifts less than 0.3 with 5% to 10% precision. These results are somewhat
misleading because to survey the entire sky with this setup would require 42 years which is not
feasible, but it shows the importance of survey speed to this experiment.
In summary, the redshift drift experiment with the SKA or 30% of the SKA is not possible. Despite
1
the fact that the cosmological redshift drift can not be observed, a pathfinder experiment could
be initiated to aim for 10 ms−1 accuracy to test the “low spectral resolution” case of the SKA
2
experiment. The anticipated accuracy of 10 ms−1 is already a factor 10 better with respect to the
radial velocity measurements of nearby standart stars and may provide already some clues to the
systematics and the ephemeris (Chubak et al. 2012).
7

Real time cosmology - A direct measure of the expansion rate of the Universe Hans-Rainer Klöckner
SKA Phase 2 (SKA)
For the SKA a generic observational setup is assumed with the following system parameters: SKA
(A / T = 13000 m2 K−1), various channel resolutions, 2 hour integration per pointing, 20 sq. de-
eff sys
grees field of view, survey coverage of 30000 sq. degrees. The observations would take 125 days
and the results are shown in the bottom panel of Figure 2 . The results show that the number counts
would be sufficient enough to trace the functional dependency of the frequency shift caused by the
cosmological expansion up to redshift of unity. The level of precision reached is a few percent and
may even reach the percent level if the integration time per pointing is 12 hours.
Due to the relatively short survey duration this experiment could even be done several times within
the life time of the SKA of 50 years.
4. Discussion & Summary
Measuring the expansion history of the Universe includes distances and the linear growth of den-
sity perturbations, and a combination of both observed at different epochs. The observations at
different epochs allows for a direct measure of the expansion history, whereas SNIa surveys, weak
lensing (Heavens 2003) and Baryon Acoustic Oscillations in the galaxy power spectrum (BAO;
Wang 2006) are generally considered to be indirect probes of the acceleration. Their results rely on
a priori knowledge of the cosmological model and even simple parameterisations of dark energy
properties can result in misleading conclusions (e.g. Bassett et al. 2004, Shapiro & Turner 2006).
In this light redshift-drift measurements are direct probes and rely only on the knowledge of the
rest frame frequency of the measured signal. Its uncertainty in testing cosmological models is the
knowledge of H . Compared to other probes with many more systematic uncertainties in parame-
0
terisation and calibration (e.g. cosmic chronometers; Moresco et al. 2012), the HI measurements
offer less biased measurement and can be assumed to be a model-independent consistency test of
cosmological theories. In addition, redshift drift measurements are sensitive to different combi-
nations of cosmological parameters and thus combined with other probes can break degeneracies
and will place stronger constrains on cosmologies (e.g. CMB, BAO, weak lensing). This comple-
mentarity nature of the redshift drift has been shown e.g. for the E-ELT case improving the CMB
constrain by a factor of 2-3 and even has the potential to constrain new physics (Martinelli et al.
2012, Vielzeuf & Martins 2012).
The SKA will be able to measure the redshift drift to levels of a few percent precision up
to redshifts of unity. The quoted measurement accuracy can be used to derive first constrains
on cosmological model and detailed forecasting on the accuracy of cosmological parameters will
be addressed in future investigations. However these precision enables us to compare the SKA
experiment already to a study of optical redshift-drift measurements. This study indicates for a
dynamical dark energy wCDM cosmology the greatest leverage on figure of merit (FOM) of the
dark energy properties. In particular, an excess of 100 of FOM for dark energy at 1% precision and
1000, if combined with the CMB. For a lower precision of 5% the FOM is 290 if combined with
the CMB and the Hubble constant (Kim et al. 2015).
Real time cosmology is possible with the SKA. The SKA is the only experiment that enables us to
trace the nature of the “close by” acceleration and may provide essential information on possible
8

Real time cosmology - A direct measure of the expansion rate of the Universe Hans-Rainer Klöckner
mechanisms in place during the inflation phase and the evolution of the Universe. However the
proposed experiment does need the full sensitivity of the SKA array, the survey speed to detect
a billion galaxies, and its technical requirements might imply some minor changes of the SKA
baseline design. In addition, this experiment would benefit from a larger field of view of about
40 sq. deg. per pointing to allow for more sensitive observations per pointing. Nevertheless, the
already relatively short survey time of the SKA allows for a even more ambitions experiment, mea-
suring the cosmic jerk term. Such measurement might be feasible if the redshift drift experiment is
performed several times within the life time of the SKA of 50 years.
Assuming the observational systematics can be modeled to 1−3ms−1 accuracy, the required spectral
resolution of 10% (0.01 Hz) can be sufficiently reduced by a factor of hundred or more. In case the
correlator can not provide the spectral resolution needed for this experiment, raw-data of individual
galaxies of Band 1 or Band 2, or a part of it, could to be streamed to a dedicated software-correlator
pipeline. In both cases the SKA will be able to detect the global signal of the redshift drift and with
a dedicated observational setup the SKA will measure the redshift dependency of the redshift drift.
Even though this is a full SKA experiment; there are precursor observations possible with the SKA
in Phase 1 to investigate the systematic effects within the ephemeris. These experiments would
aim to investigate the properties of the 3-dimensional velocity vector of the Earth at resolutions of
meter/s using the HI signal of nearby galaxies and HI in absorption toward quasars. Measurements
of the 3-dimensional velocity vector will not only have cosmological applications they may also
have the potential to model the Earth’s gravitational field and could open up new synergies between
the SKA and lunar ranging experiments.
Finally, the measurements of the redshift drift in redshift space by the SKA and the E-ELT (both
sampling different redshift ranges) and the combination of their measurements are the only exper-
iments that will fully trace the real-time evolution of the dark energy in the Universe.
References
[1] Balbi A., Quercellini C., 2007, MNRAS, 382, 1623;
[2] Bassett B.A., Corasaniti P.S., Kunz M., 2004, ApJL, 617, 1;
[3] Chubak C., et. al., 2012, astro-ph\1207.6212;
[4] Champion D. J., et. al., 2010, ApJ, 720, 201;
[5] De Lucia G., Blaizot J., 2007, MNRAS, 375, 2;
[6] Gudmundsson E.H., Björnsson G., 2002, ApJ, 565, 1;
[7] Heavens A., 2003, MNRAS, 343, 1327;
[8] Hobbs G., et. al., 2012, MNRAS, 427, 2780;
[9] Hinshaw G., et al., 2013, ApJS, 208, 19;
[10] Kanekar N., et. al., 2012, ApJ, 746, 16;
[11] Kim A.G., Linder E.V., Edelstein J., Erskine D., 2015, Astroparticle Physics, 62, 195;
[12] Klöckner H.-R., 2012, in "Pathway to the SKA - The German White Paper", eds. H.-R. Klöckner,M.
Kramer, H. Falcke, D. Schwarz, A. Eckart, G. Kauffmann, A. Zensus, astro-ph\1301.4124;
9

Real time cosmology - A direct measure of the expansion rate of the Universe Hans-Rainer Klöckner
[13] Klöckner H.-R., Auld R., Heywood I., Obreschkow D., Levrier F., Rawlings S., 2009, PoS(SKADS
2009)009;
[14] Lindegren L., Dravins D., 2003, A&A, 401, 1185;
[15] Loeb A., 1998, ApJL, 499, 111;
[16] Liske J., et. al., 2008a, The Messenger, 133, 10;
[17] Liske J., et. al., 2008b, MNRAS, 386, 1192;
[18] Maiolino R., et. al., 2013, in “The White Paper for the E-ELT HIRES”, astro-ph\1310.3163;
[19] Martinelli M., Pandolfi S., Martins C.J.A.P., Vielzeuf P.E. 2012, Physical Review D, 86, 123001;
[20] Moresco M., et. al., 2012, JCAP08(2012)006;
[21] Obreschkow D., Klöckner H.-R., Heywood I., Levrier F., Rawlings S., 2009, ApJ, 703, 1890
[22] Pasquini L., et. al., 2005, The Messenger, 122,10;
[23] Perlmutter S., et. al., 1999, ApJ, 517, 565;
[24] Planck Collaboration, et al., 2013, astro-ph\1303.5076;
[25] Quercellini C., Amendola L., Balbi A., Cabella P., Quartin M., Physics Reports, 2012, 521-3, 95;
[26] Riess A.G., et. al., 1998, AJ, 116, 1009;
[27] Sandage A., 1962, ApJ, 136, 319;
[28] Shapiro C., Turner M.S., 2006, ApJ, 649, 563;
[29] Vielzeuf P.E., Martins C.J.A.P. 2012, Physical Review D, 85, 087301;
[30] Wang Y., 2006, ApJ, 647, 1
[31] Westmeier T., Jurek R., Obreschkow D., Koribalski B. S., Staveley-Smith L., 2013, MNRAS, 438,
1176;
10