Mathematical Modelling of Polarizing GTPases
in Developing Axons
Natalie Emken∗ Andreas W. Pu¨schel¶§ Martin Burger∗§
September 19, 2018
2102 yaM 92  ]CS.oib-q[  2v5275.4021:viXra
Abstract
The aim of this paper is to contribute to the basic understanding of neuronal po-
larization mechanisms by developing and studying a reaction-diffusion model for protein
activation and inactivation. In particular we focus on a feedback loop between PI3 kinase
and specific GTPases, and study its behaviour in dependence of neurite lengths.
We find that if an ultrasensitive activation is included, the model can produce polar-
ization at a critical length as observed in experiments. Symmetry breaking to polarization
in the longer neurite is found only if active transport of a factor, in our case active PI3
kinase, is included into the model.
1 Introduction
Neuronal polarization is a key process in brain development, whose molecular origin is still
far from being completely understood. Clearly, the differentiation of neurites into axons (in
general only one) and several dendrites is a key mechanism for the structure and function
of the brain, and thus the process is likely steered by external cues. On the other hand
various lab experiments with cultured hippocampal neurons (cf. [5, 9]) show that a robust
polarization and differentiation also occurs without external cues, driven by the activity of
GTPases and other proteins. We refer to [1, 2, 3, 25, 28] for detailed discussions of neuronal
polarity.
During early development a neuron first extends several unspecified neurites that show
random episodes of growth and retraction resulting in a constant average length. At a later
stage a polarization in the distribution of several proteins occurs and usually one of the
neurites is specified as the axon, which results in the stabilization of microtubuli (cf. [34])
and a phase of fast growth, while the other neurites grow slower and later become dendrites.
The molecular origin of neuronal polarity is a spatial reorganization of proteins towards the tip
of the longest neurite, which seems to appear when one of the neurites has reached a critical
length (depending however on the overall configuration). In particular the sequential activity
of the GTPases Rap1B, Cdc42, and Rho/Rac GTPases has been found to be of fundamental
importance for the differentiation of an axon.
∗Institut fu¨r Numerische und Angewandte Mathematik, Westfa¨lische Wilhelms-Universita¨t (WWU)
Mu¨nster Einsteinstr. 62, D 48149 Mu¨nster, Germany ({natalie.emken,martin.burger}@wwu.de)
¶Institut fu¨r Molekulare Zellbiologie, WWU Mu¨nster, Schlossplatz 5, D 48149 Mu¨nster, Germany
(apuschel@wwu.de)
§Cells in Motion Interfaculty Center (CIMIC), WWU Mu¨nster
1

The aim of this paper is to gain further understanding of neuronal polarization and
symmetry-breaking as observed in cultured neurons by mathematical modelling of the GT-
Pase signalling cascades, diffusion, and possibly transport. In particular we want to tackle
the following questions:
• Can a feedback loop between GTPases and PI3 kinase that has been found in experi-
ments lead to an inherent length-dependent polarization mechanism ?
• Is a suggested ultrasensive reaction essential for the polarization ?
• What can cause symmetry breaking and determine the strongly preferred polarization
of signaling molecules in the longest neurite ?
We want to understand these issues by modelling activation of PI3 kinase and GTPases
such as Rho, Rac, Ras, Cdc42, Rap1B, which are key players in the establishment of polarity
and the growth of axons (cf. [10, 7, 26, 31, 35]). Similar pathways of GTPases are found
also in the polarization of other cell types (cf. [23, 6]). In particular the establishment of
polarity in eukaryotic cells such as yeast, which appears to be a reasonably simple model
system, has recently attracted much attention in the applied mathematics community (cf.
[22, 27, 12, 8, 13, 14]), and significant progress has been made very recently in understanding
basic mechanisms as well as in the mathematical analysis of such models (cf. [11, 18, 20, 19]).
Modelling the polarization of axons is a topic less studied (cf. [24]), probably also due to
the higher complexity in neurons. On the other hand the length-dependent mechanism and
the preferential polarization of signaling cascades to the longer neurites is a robust process
that a model should be able to explain at least qualitatively. Moreover, the changing length
provides additional variability that allows to rule out certain models.
The key assumption of our modeling approach, which seems to be in good agreement with
experiments (cf. e.g. [9]) is that none of the neurites is predetermined to become the axon,
and there is no polarization in neurite lengths without polarization in signaling proteins,
more precisely GTPases. As described above, we consider the growth (and retraction) in the
initial stage as random, and thus there can be some polarization in neurite length. However,
without polarization in molecular distributions it seems quite unreasonable that a neurite at
a certain length can become stable and subsequently differentiates to the axon. Thus, we ask
whether mathematical modelling of GTPase activation can explain the stabilization of the
longest neurite when it has reached a critical length by stochastic growth.
As we want to focus on the polarization of GTPase distributions it is natural to set up a
reaction-diffusion model to study spatial variation. Noticing that overall growth is slow, it is
natural to assume that the reaction-diffusion process reaches equilibrium at fixed length, in
particular if the equilibria are close also after an incremental growth step. The latter applies
in particular for stationary concentrations being spatially homogeneous and thus we can argue
that polarization will only appear if at a certain critical length the homogeneous stationary
solution becomes unstable and a polarized solution showing a peak on one end appears.
There are several suggestions of extracellular and stochastic processes that influence polarity
(cf. [2, 3, 28]), which can be understood as small perturbations of the homogeneous state.
Thus, we consider the modelling of GTPase activation on fixed domains, but investigate the
influence of different domain sizes. In particular we expect the homogeneous stationary state
to become unstable at a critical length, which we interpret as length-dependent polarization.
2

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we will develop a basic
mathematical model of activation mechanisms in developing neurites, which is further sim-
plified in Section 3 and investigated numerically. In Section 4 we discuss the extension to an
appropriate setup for a neuron with two neurites and investigate the possibility of symmetry-
breaking. Finally we provide further analytical insight via a minimal model in Section 5 and
conclude in Section 6.
2 A Model for Activation of GTPases in Neurites
In the following we derive a reaction-diffusion model for the polarization in neurites starting
with a general approach to the modelling of GTPase activation and then proceeding to a
specific signal pathway, which results in a system of reaction-diffusion equations.
2.1 General Aspects in Modelling GTPases
As mentioned above GTPases, appearing in cytosolic and membrane-bound forms, are of cen-
tral importance for regulating neuronal polarization via feedback-loops and signaling growth.
We therefore start by discussing the general modelling of GTPases first before turning to
the specific signalling cascade. We follow the basic approach of [12, 13] and first detail a
submodel for a single GTPase (ignoring for the moment the signal pathways between dif-
ferent molecules), composed of three states the GTPase can switch to. There is an inactive
cytosolic form (bound to GDI), an inactive membrane-bound form (bound to GDP), and an
active membrane-bound form (bound to GTP). For the concentrations we use the following
notations:
• G denotes the membrane-bound active form
a
• G denotes the membrane-bound inactive Form
m
• G denotes the cytosolic inactive form
c
We base the modelling on similar assumptions as [12], motivated by experimental obser-
vations:
1. Neuronal polarization is sufficiently fast, also compared to growth. Thus we consider
models on fixed geometries (however focusing on the impact on different neurite lengths)
and assume that Rho-proteins are neither synthesized nor degradated at the relevant
time scale. We only model the change between different forms.
2. Each Rho-protein has spectific rates of activation and inactivation. These processes are
indirect and controlled by GEFs and GAPs, respectively (see Figure 1).
3. The amount of GDI in the developing neuron is sufficiently high such that it does not
become a limiting factor, and the change between the cytosolic and membrane-bound
form is sufficiently fast. The latter is not crucial, but will allow to reduce the model to
two forms, making the model easier to treat.
4. Cytosolic forms diffuse much faster than membrane-bound forms (by a factor of around
100, cf. [22]). Again this is not crucial for the basic modelling, but will become crucial
for forming a Turing-type instability: the concentration of cytosolic forms will be rather
homogeneous, while active forms will polarize at the membrane.
3

5. Since Rho-Proteins have almost equal sizes, we will assume that the diffusion coeffi-
cients of different proteins in the active respectively inactive form are the same. This
assumption is not crucial for the modelling and easily changed in the equations, but it
appears convenient for numerical simulations.
Let us denote the interior of the neurite as Ω and the membrane as Γ ⊂ ∂Ω. The cytosolic
concentration is modeled by a bulk diffusion equation
∂ G = D ∆G in Ω, (2.1)
t c c c
with ∆ denoting the Laplace operator. The membrane-bound concentrations are modeled by
reaction-diffusion equations on the surface
∂ G = D ∆ G + R (G ,G ) on Γ (2.2)
t a m Γ a am a m
∂ G = D ∆ G − R (G ,G ) + R (G ,G ) on Γ, (2.3)
t m m Γ m am a m mc m c
where ∆ denotes the Laplace-Beltrami operator on Γ. The reactions (activation and inacti-
Γ
vation) between the two membrane-bound forms are given by
− +
R (G ,G ) = −k GAP G + k GEF G , (2.4)
am a m G G a G G m
+ −
with the activation rate k and inactivation rate k , and the reactions (exchange) between
G G
the inactive forms are given by
− +
R (G ,G ) = −k G + k G , (2.5)
mc m c GDI m GDI c
+ −
with the GDI-controlled rates k und k (cf. Figure 1). Finally, the boundary condition
GDI GDI
for G is given by
c
D ∇G · n = −R (G ,G ) on Γ. (2.6)
c c mc m c
Figure 1: GTPase reaction scheme (following [6]). The GDI-bound form diffuses in the cytosol
−
and associates to the membrane with rate k . On the other hand the membrane-bound
GDI
+
form is released and bound to GDI with rate k .
GDI
We can further simplify the system based on the assumption of a fast exchange between
the two inactive form, such that R = 0 on Γ, i.e.
mc
−
k
0 = k− G − k+ G ⇔ G = GDI G . (2.7)
GDI m GDI c c + m
k
GDI
4

Finally, taking into account the elongated form of neurites, it is natural to reduce to a one-
dimensional system. For this sake assume that x is the longitudinal axis of a neurite and let
P denote the two-dimensional plane where x = ξ. Now we define effective concentrations of
ξ
active and inactive forms
(cid:90)
u (x,t) = G (x,y,z,t) ds(y,z), (2.8)
a a
P ∩Γ
x
(cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:90)
u (x,t) = G (x,y,z,t) ds(y,z) + G (x,y,z,t) dy dz. (2.9)
i m i
P ∩Γ P ∩Ω
x x
Since we assume cross-sections to be small relative to the length, we can assume equilibration
by diffusion in the y and z directions at a time scale relevant for longitudinal diffusion and
reaction, such that we can well approximate all concentrations as independent of y and z. In
particular we have with (2.7)
−
k
u ≈ |P ∩ Γ|G , u ≈ (|P ∩ Ω| GDI + |P ∩ Γ|)G := λG . (2.10)
a x a i x + x m m
k
GDI
Thus, we find
(cid:90)
−1
∂ u = ∂ G ds(y,z) ≈ |P ∩Γ|(D ∂ G +R (G ,G )) ≈ D ∂ u +R (u ,λ |P ∩Γ|u )
t a t a x m xx a am a m m xx a am a x i
P ∩Γ
x
and
(cid:90) (cid:90) (cid:90)
∂ u = ∂ G ds(y,z) + ∂ G dy dz
t i t m t i
P ∩Γ P ∩Ω
x x
≈ |P ∩ Γ|(D ∂ G − R (G ,G )) + D |P ∩ Ω|∂ G
x m xx m am a m c x xx c
−1
≈ D ∂ u − R (u ,λ |P ∩ Γ|u ),
mc xx i am a x i
with the effective diffusion coefficient
−
k
D = λ−1 |P ∩ Γ|D + λ−1 |P ∩ Ω|D GDI . (2.11)
mc x m x c +
k
GDI
Thus, with redefining k˜+ = λ−1|P ∩ Γ| k+ , we end up with the system
G x G
− ˜+
∂ u = D ∂ u − k GAP u + k GEF u , (2.12)
t a m xx a G G a G G i
− ˜+
∂ u = D ∂ u + k GAP u − k GEF u (2.13)
t i mc xx i G G a G G i
for the activated and inactivated forms of the GTPases. Note that under typical parameter
values we still expect D to be much larger than D due to its dependence on D .
mc m c
2.2 Modelling the PI3-Kinase Signal Pathway
In the following we try to model the most important signal pathways leading to neuronal
polarization. We mainly follow signal cascades described in [2, 7, 35, 28]. Motivated by
polarization models for eukaryotic cells, we particularly look for a feedback mechanism, which
can lead to bistability or Turing-type instability. Such a feedback loop is known for the
activation of PI3 kinases, which is discussed as a possible source for neuronal polarity [2, 7].
5

During polarization PI3kinases generate a feedback loop in a process involving their prod-
uct PIP , the GTPases Ras, Rap1B, Cdc42, Rho, and Rac, as well as complexes such as
3
PAR3/PAR6/aPKC. In order to keep the modelling at a reasonable complexity, we will not
go into details of the biochemistry, but just assume some activity of canonical complexes
involved in all the inhibitions and activations. The basic signalling pathway is sketched in
Figure 2, where the K denote complexes involved and the indices a, i, c denote active, in-
i
active membrane-bound, and cytosolic form, respectively. As demonstrated in the previous
section, we will reduce all GTPases to an active and an inactive form.
The GDP/GTP exchange of Rac is controlled by Cdc42 via the PAR3/PAR6/aPKC com-
plex and recruitment of specific GEFs (like TIAM and STEF). We thus use a complex K
1
for the activation of Rac in our model. PI3 kinase is activated by the active forms of Ras
and Rac, and inhibited by PTEN, which is controlled by Rho. We thus assume a complex
K , which contributes to inactivation of PI3 kinase. Moreover, PI3kinase indirectly activates
2
Cdc42 via PIP3 and Rap1B (cf. [26]). In addition to those factors specific GAPs for Cdc42
and Rac can intercept the feedback loop. We will denote them as complexes K und K .
3 4
We will model the above reactions simply via the law of mass action, except one, namely
the activation of PI3 kinase by Rac, for which we use a square law (alternatively Hill-type
activation as e.g. in [19] are possible). Frequently ultrasensitive reactions, i.e. significantly
steeper than the shape of Michaelis-Menten kinetics, are supposed. Indeed there is an experi-
mental observation of ultrasensitivity of Rap1B against signals of different receptors reported
in [16]. Since the Rap1B signalling pathways is related to PI3 kinase, we assume its ultra-
sensitive activation by Rac in our model. However, we think that also other ultrasensitive
reactions in the feedback loop PI3 kinase - Cdc42 - Rac would have a similar effect - a detailed
determination of those remains a challenge for future experiments. On the other hand the
existence of an ultrasensitive reaction seems crucial as we shall show in a minimal model in
Section 5.
The above considerations yield the following reaction-diffusion model for the PI3 kinase
concentration
+ + 2 +
∂ PI3K =k Ras PI3K + k Rac PI3K − k K PI3K + D ∂ PI3K , (2.14)
t a 6 a i 7 a i 5 2 a PI3K a xx a
+ + 2 +
∂ PI3K = − k Ras PI3K − k Rac PI3K + k K PI3K + D ∂ PI3K . (2.15)
t i 6 a i 7 a i 5 2 a PI3K i xx i
Using the above reaction scheme in addition to the general submodel for GTPases from the
previous section, we obtain a system of eight differential equations for the active and inactive
forms of Ras, Cdc42, Rac, and Rho:
+ −
∂ Ras =k Ras − k Ras + D ∂ Ras , (2.16)
t a Ras i Ras a m xx a
+ −
∂ Ras = − k Ras + k Ras + D ∂ Ras , (2.17)
t i Ras i Ras a mc xx i
+ + − −
∂ Cdc =k Cdc + k PI3K Cdc − k Cdc − k K Cdc (2.18)
t a Cdc i 8 a i Cdc a 9 4 a
+ − + −
− k Cdc + k K − k Cdc + k K + D ∂ Cdc ,
1 a 1 1 3 a 3 3 m xx a
+ + −
∂ Cdc = − k Cdc − k PI3K Cdc + k Cdc (2.19)
t i Cdc i 8 a i Cdc a
−
+ k K Cdc + D ∂ Cdc ,
9 4 a mc xx i
6

Figure 2: Signalling scheme of GTPases involved in our model including the feedback loop
PI3kinase - Cdc42 - Rac.
+ + − −
∂ Rac =k Rac + k K Rac − k Rac − k K Rac (2.20)
t a Rac i 10 1 i Rac a 11 3 a
+ −
− k Rac + k K + D ∂ Rac ,
4 a 4 4 m xx a
+ + − −
∂ Rac = − k Rac − k K Rac + k Rac + k K Rac (2.21)
t i Rac i 10 1 i Rac a 11 3 a
+ D ∂ Rac ,
mc xx i
+ − + −
∂ Rho =k Rho − k Rho − k Rho + k K + D ∂ Rho , (2.22)
t a Rho i Rho a 2 a 2 2 m xx a
+ −
∂ Rho = − k Rho + k Rho + D ∂ Rho , (2.23)
t i Rho i Rho a mc xx i
Finally we obtain model equations for the different complexes, for which we ignore diffusion:
+ − + −
∂ K =k Cdc − k K , ∂ K = k Rho − k K ,
t 1 1 a 1 1 t 2 2 a 2 2
+ − + −
∂ K =k Cdc − k K , ∂ K = k Rac − k K .
t 3 3 a 3 3 t 4 4 a 4 4
We mention that the model can be seen as a mass-conserved reaction-diffusion system sim-
ilar to those proposed for eukaryotic cells. In particular the following conservation properties
7

hold in the absence of diffusion:
∂ (Ras + Ras ) = 0, (2.24)
t a i
∂ (Cdc + Cdc + K + K ) = 0, (2.25)
t a i 1 3
∂ (Rac + Rac + K ) = 0, (2.26)
t a i 4
∂ (Rho + Rho + K ) = 0, (2.27)
t a i 2
∂ (PI3K + PI3K ) = 0. (2.28)
t a i
We mention that the result of our modelling is a system of 14 equations, which is still difficult
to handle. We will therefore try to further reduce it to a system of six equations for the
active and inactive forms of PI3 kinase, Cdc42, and Rac, whose feedback loop shall be the
key aspect for polarization.
3 A Six-Equations Model
In the following we shall further reduce the system. First of all we assume that the reactions
via all complexes are fast at the relevant time scales, which yields
+ +
k k
K = 1 Cdc := κ Cdc , K = 2 Rho := κ Rho ,
1 − a 1 a 2 − a 2 a
k k
1 2
+ +
k k
K = 3 Cdc := κ Cdc , K = 4 Rac := κ Rac .
3 − a 3 a 4 − a 4 a
k k
3 4
Moreover, we try to eliminate the equations for the GTPases Ras and Rho, since they act
on PI3 kinase, but are not influenced by the components of the feedback loop - we therefore
assume they equilibrate and obtain the relations
+
k
Ras = RasRas (3.1)
a − i
k
Ras
+
k
Rho = RasRho . (3.2)
a − i
k
Rho
Further approximating the inactive concentration as homogeneous and using the conservation
properties we find
k+
Ras
k−
Ras = Ras Ras := γ Ras , (3.3)
a ∗ 1 ∗
k+
1 + Ras
k−
Ras
k+
Ras
k−
Rho = Rho Rho := γ Rho , (3.4)
a ∗ 2 ∗
k+ k+
1 + Ras + κ Ras
k− 2 k−
Rho Rho
where the index ∗ denotes the total concentrations in the system, which we assume fixed.
8

Inserting those simplifications into (2.14)-(2.24) we finally obtain a system of six reaction-
diffusion equations for the concentrations of PI3 kinase and the GTPases Cdc42 and Rac:
+ + −
∂ Cdc =k Cdc + k PI3K Cdc − k Cdc (3.5)
t a Cdc i 8 a i Cdc a
−
− k κ Rac Cdc + D ∂ Cdc ,
9 4 a a m xx a
+ + −
∂ Cdc = − k Cdc − k PI3K Cdc + k Cdc (3.6)
t i Cdc i 8 a i Cdc a
−
+ k κ Rac Cdc + D ∂ Cdc ,
9 4 a a mc xx i
+ + −
∂ Rac =k Rac + k κ Cdc Rac − k Rac (3.7)
t a Rac i 10 1 a i Rac a
−
− k κ Cdc Rac + D ∂ Rac ,
11 3 a a m xx a
+ + −
∂ Rac = − k Rac − k κ Cdc Rac + k Rac (3.8)
t i Rac i 10 1 a i Rac a
−
+ k κ Cdc Rac + D ∂ Rac ,
11 3 a a mc xx i
∂ PI3K = − k κ γ Rho PI3K + k γ Ras PI3K (3.9)
t a 5 2 1 ∗ a 6 2 ∗ i
2
+ k Rac PI3K + D ∂ PI3K ,
7 a a PI3K a xx a
∂ PI3K = + k κ γ Rho PI3K − k γ Ras PI3K (3.10)
t i 5 2 1 ∗ a 6 2 ∗ i
2
− k Rac PI3K + D ∂ PI3K .
7 a i PI3K i xx i
3.1 Dimensionless Variables and Scaling
In order to eliminate the dependence on dimensions and in particular to rescale the domain
to unit size, which simplifies the systematic investigation of length-dependent polarization,
we perform a scaling of the variables in the system (3.5)-(3.10). We denote the dimensional
˜
variables used in the previous section by x˜ and t and introduce new space and time variables
and new concentrations via
t = t˜ , x = x˜, (cid:15) = L 0
τ L L
u = Cdc L, u = Rac L, u = PI3K L
1 a 3 a 5 a
u = Cdc L, u = Rac L, u = PI3K L
2 i 4 i 6 i
where τ is a suitable time scale and L is the total length of the system (to be varied in the
following). L ia an arbitrary but fixed reference length used to introduce the dimensionless
0
parameter (cid:15) and thus formulate the question of length-dependent polarization in terms of (cid:15).
For (cid:15) large (small length) we do not expect polarity, thus there should be a homogeneous
solution u = (u ,u ,u ,u ,u ,u ). At critical (cid:15), the homogeneous solutions should become
1 2 3 4 5 6
unstable and different solutions showing maxima of the active concentrations (u for i odd)
i
at the boundary should appear.
The scaled version of (3.5)-(3.10) is given by
2
∂ u =α u + (cid:15)α u u − α u − (cid:15)α u u + d (cid:15) ∂ u , (3.11)
t 1 1 2 2 5 2 3 1 4 3 1 1 xx 1
2
∂ u = − α u − (cid:15)α u u + α u + (cid:15)α u u + (cid:15) ∂ u , (3.12)
t 2 1 2 2 5 2 3 1 4 3 1 xx 2
2
∂ u =α u + (cid:15)α u u − α u − (cid:15)α u u + d (cid:15) ∂ u , (3.13)
t 3 5 4 6 1 4 7 3 8 1 3 1 xx 3
2
∂ u = − α u − (cid:15)α u u + α u + (cid:15)α u u + (cid:15) ∂ u , (3.14)
t 4 5 4 6 1 4 7 3 8 1 3 xx 4
2 2 2
∂ u = − α u + α u + (cid:15) α u u + d (cid:15) ∂ u , (3.15)
t 5 9 5 10 6 11 3 6 2 xx 5
2 2 2
∂ u =α u − α u − (cid:15) α u u + d (cid:15) ∂ u , (3.16)
t 6 9 5 10 6 11 3 6 3 xx 6
with the new parameters given in Table 1.
9

α = k+ L2/D α = k+ L /D
1 Cdc 0 mc 2 8 0 mc
α = k− L2/D α = k− κ L /D
3 Cdc 0 mc 4 9 4 0 m
α = k+ L2/D α = k+ κ L /D
5 Rac 0 mc 6 10 1 0 mc
α = k− L2/D α = k− κ L /D
7 Rac 0 mc 8 11 3 0 mc
α = k κ γ Rho L2/D α = k γ Ras L2/D
9 5 2 1 ∗ 0 mc 10 6 2 ∗ 0 mc
α = k /D d = D /D
11 7 mc 1 m mc
d = D /D d = D /D
2 PI3K mc 3 PI3K mc
a i
τ = L2/D (cid:15) = L /L
0 m 0
Table 1: Overview of dimensionsless parameters in (3.11)-(3.16)
We use this model now on the unit interval with no-flux boundary conditions, i.e.
∂ u | = 0. (3.17)
x i x=0,1
Note that the system has three volume-conserving subsystems, we have
(cid:90) 1
∂ (u + u )dx = 0, for i = 1,3,5. (3.18)
t i i+1
0
Of course it would be an ideal case to obtain the parameters in the model from experi-
mental observations, which are currently not available in most cases however. Based on data
on protein diffusion used in [22] we use a factor 100 in the diffusion coefficients between the
cytosolic and membrane-bound forms of GTPases. Their values for cytosolic diffusion coeffi-
cients are around 10−50µm2/s−1 and for membrane diffusion coefficients around 0.1µm2/s−1,
which we use for our simulations. For PI3 kinase we use the value of 0.1µm2/s−1, since it
is still bound to the membrane via receptors. Moreover we assume cytosolic diffusion for
the inactive form and thus a diffusion speed of 10µm/s−1, motivated by its association with
inactive Rap1B. Rates of activation and inactivation cannot be found in literature, so we use
rough estimates leading to reasonable time scales. The used dimensionless values are given
in Table 2.
3.2 Numerical Results
In the following we present results of numerical simulations of the system (3.11)-(3.16) on
the unit interval with boundary conditions (3.17). All results were computed in MATLAB
with the pdepe tool. To check that there are no discretization artefacts and that computed
equilibria are robust we also used an independent upwind finite difference implementation
with backward Euler time discretization, which led to the same results up to numerical errors
and are not displayed here.
The initial value in all simulations is a perturbation of homogeneous states for all con-
centrations. Both cosine-type and random perturbations were used, which lead to the same
results except that the direction of polarity is predefined by the sign of the cosine perturbation,
while random perturbations lead to random choice of direction.
In order to investigate the ability to reproduce length-dependent polarization we run the
system with initial concentrations u = 0.5 + 0.001cosπx for different sizes of L until a
i
stationary state is reached (t = 100000 seems to be a reasonable choice). The results are
given in Figure 3. One observes that for the parameter set given in Table 2 length-dependent
10

Parameter Value Parameter Value
α 0.001 α 0.01
1 8
α 0.5 α 0.1
2 9
α 0.01 α 5
3 10
α 0.01 α 0.001
4 11
α 0.001 d 0.01
5 1
α 1 d 0.01
6 2
α 0.01 d 0.01
7 3
Table 2: Dimensionless parameter values used for numerical simulations
polarization occurs at around L = 7. For smaller values the constant solution is stable, while
for larger values a peak close to the left boundary (due to the higher perturbations on the
left) appears, which is more and more pronounced for increasing L. To illustrate the time
evolution leading to these stationary states we plot the concentrations at several intermediate
time steps for the case L = 12.
Figure 3: Stationary concentrations for different sizes of L.
Clearly the specific perturbation cosπx has a certain influence on the selection of the
stationary solution, since e.g. for a perturbation with opposite sign one would end up with
a solution mirrored at x = 1 due to the inherent symmetry in the system. However, apart
2
from the selection of a solution with left or right peaks, the perturbation seems not to be too
crucial. To test this we use various random perturbations (uniformly distributed in each grid
point) and the resulting stationary solutions are always the same as for the low-frequency
cosine perturbation, except that with same probability we also obtain the mirrored one. To
illustrate this we plot the resulting stationary concentrations for L = 12 in the left panel of
11

Figure 4: Evolution of active Cdc42, Rac and PI3 kinase concentrations in a case leading to
polarization.
Figure 5. The only type of perturbation that does not yield peak solutions also for large L is
a deterministic high-frequency one. This is not surprising since for large pure frequencies the
diffusion dominates and smoothes the perturbation. This feature is illustrated in the right
panel of Figure 5 with a plot of the resulting stationary concentrations in the case L = 12.
Figure 5: Stationary concentrations for a (pointwise uniformly) random perturbation (left)
and a high frequency perturbation (right).
4 Symmetry Breaking and Axon Polarization
In the previous section we have seen that the reaction diffusion model for PI3 kinase, Cdc42
and Rac is indeed able to reproduce length-dependent polarization, which is a first confirma-
tive answer to the possible existence of an inherent mechanism. The remaining question is
how the symmetry in the system is broken, in particular how the observation that polariza-
tion to a peak appears usually at the tip of the longest neurite (cf. [5]) can be explained.
For this sake we extend the model in the following to deal with a setup including neurites
of different lengths. Since we want to keep the setting reasonably simple we use a system
with two neurites separated by the soma as sketched in (6), which still seems reasonable to
be reduced to one spatial dimension and for which there is also some biological motivation as
highlighted in [4].
12

Figure 6: Setup of a neuronal cell with two developing neurons of lengths L and L , with a
1 2
soma of length L inbetween.
0
4.1 Modelling the Soma
Our main rationale for including the soma into our model is that the mobility (and hence the
diffusion coefficient) is lowered. For the cytosolic form this is due to the cell nucleus, which
prevents flow in a large fraction of the soma, and for the membrane-bound form this is due to
the additional curvature of the membrane along the soma, which is otherwise not incorporated
in our model. Consequently we change all terms ∂ u in (3.11)-(3.16) to ∂ (d (x)∂ u ), with
xx i x i x i
(cid:40)
1 if 0 < x < l and (l + l ) < x < 1,
1 1 0
d (x) = (4.1)
i
c < 1 if l < x < (l + l ).
i 1 1 0
For illustrative numerical tests we choose the values c = 0.6 for i odd (membrane) and
i
c = 0.3 (cytosol) and all other parameters as in the previous section, but similar results have
i
been found for other settings. For more intuitive visualization we rescale the lengths on the
x-axis in all plots and center the system such that the mid point of the soma is located at
x = 0, in addition we use a light coloring of the soma region. We again use initial values
u (x,0) = 0.5 + 0.001cosπx.
i
Figure 7 demonstrates that still length-dependent polarization, in this case at around a
length L = 7.3 of the overall system, appears. The increase in the critical length compared
to Figure 3 is due to the fact that the overall diffusion is smaller due to the soma. In these
examples polarization occurs in the (longer) left neurite. However, there is no symmetry
breaking towards polarization in the longer neurite, but the effect is caused by the positive
initial perturbation in the left part. In a variety of simulations with different perturbations
and length distributions we observed similar behaviour as in the model without soma, in
particular a nonsymmetric initial perturbation most strongly influences the choice of the
polarization. This is illustrated in Figure 8 with results varying the lengths L and L , while
1 2
keeping all other parameters - in particular the shape of the perturbation - as above. A
conclusion from these simulations is that the existence of a soma is not sufficient to obtain
a symmetry-breaking towards polarization in the longer neurite as observed in experiments.
We will thus consider a further extension in the next section.
4.2 Active Transport
Besides the mechanisms included in the model so far, it has been suggested that active
anterograde transport has an important role in neuronal polarization (cf. [25, 30]). We will
thus extend the model to include such a transport term. Our detailed motivation is a report
13

Figure 7: Stationary concentrations for different sizes of L.
of active transport of Shootin1 in [17], which has been identified to be a protein related to
the localization of PI3 kinase (cf. [29]). Thus, we modify the (scaled) equation for the active
PI3 kinase concentration to
2 2 2
∂ u = − α u + (cid:15) α u u + α u + (cid:15) ∂ (d (x)∂ u ) (4.2)
t 5 9 5 10 3 6 11 6 x 5 x 5
− (cid:15)∂ (v(x)u ),
x 5
with

−v if 0 < x < l ,
 1

v(x) = v if (l + l ) < x < l , (4.3)
1 0 2

 0 else.
Since we are not aware of another experimental proof of active transport we keep the equations
for the other concentrations unchanged here, but remark that our computational tests show
similar results if active transport is added to any other equation. We also mention that here
we use equal constant velocities in both neurites for simplicity. In [30] it was even suspected
that the transport velocity for Shootin 1 is growing with the neurite length, which also does
not change our qualitative results.
The surprising result of using (even small) active transport is that symmetry breaking
appears as in experiments and all observed effects are reproduced. The polarization now
occurs mainly in the longer neurite even for positive perturbations in the shorter one. This is
illustrated by the time evolutions of the active concentrations in Figure 9, again with initial
value u (x,0) = 0.5+0.001cosπx. The positive initial perturbation in the shorter left neurite
i
reverted towards a positive perturbation in the longer neurite and subsequently a similar
evolution towards the stationary state as in the symmetric case.
Some stationary solutions in the case of active transport, all obtained with the same initial
value, are shown in Figure 10. The polarization appears in any case in the longer neurite.
14

Figure 8: Stationary concentrations for constant length L and varying neurite lengths L and
1
L .
2
Another interesting observation is that stronger transport always leads to polarization
in the longer neurite as we illustrate by Figure 11. Here at a small transport v = 0.001 the
polarization occurs in the left neurite, which is a bit smaller. However, doubling the transport
speed also yields polarization in the longer one despite the very small length difference and
the positive perturbation in the shorter one.
Finally, an experimental observation that is reproduced with active transport as well is
the fact that polarization depends on the length configuration of the neurites, in particular
their length difference in the case of two neurites. This is illustrated by the results in Figure
12, where the total system length L = 7.4 is kept fixed. However, in the case of two neurites
of equal length this does not suffice to produce polarization, whereas in the case of one very
large and one very small neurite the polarization clearly occurs.
5 Analysis of a Minimal Model
In order to gain some analytical insight into the polarization behaviour we study a minimal
model in the following by reducing to the essential qualitative features, namely an active and
an inactive form together with a nonlinear feedback loop in the activation.
Denoting the active concentration by u and the inactive by u , we study a system of the
1 2
following form
2
∂ u =(cid:15) ∂ u + ρ((cid:15)u )u − δu , (5.1)
t 1 xx 1 1 2 1
2
∂ u =D(cid:15) ∂ u − ρ((cid:15)u )u + δu , (5.2)
t 2 xx 2 1 2 1
R R
for x ∈ (0,1) and t > 0. Clearly δ > 0 and ρ : → is a potentially nonlinear function
+ +
15

Figure 9: Evolution of active Cdc42, Rac and PI3 kinase concentrations in a case leading to
polarization.
modelling the activation feedback loop. We normalize the mass such that
(cid:90) 1
(u + u ) dx = 1. (5.3)
1 2
0
We analyze the existence and stability of stationary solutions of (5.1), (5.2). Homogeneous
stationary solutions satisfy
∗ ∗
u = 1 − u , (5.4)
2 1
∗ ∗ ∗
ρ((cid:15)u )(1 − u ) = δu . (5.5)
1 1 1
Stability of homogeneous solutions is given if the Jacobian of the reaction term
F(u ,u ) = (ρ((cid:15)u )u − δu ,−ρ((cid:15)u )u + δu )
1 2 1 2 1 1 2 1
has eigenvalues with nonpositive real parts. The eigenvalues are given by λ = 0 und λ =
1 2
−δ − ρ + (cid:15)ρ(cid:48)u∗. Hence, we obtain the stability condition
2
∗ (cid:48) ∗ ∗
δ + ρ((cid:15)u ) ≥ (cid:15)ρ ((cid:15)u )u . (5.6)
1 1 2
To check for Turing instability it suffices to consider the linearization of the reaction diffusion
system for perturbations cos(kπ), with a natural number k, since those are the eigenfunctions
of the second derivative with Neumann boundary conditions. For µ = k2π2 the eigenvalues of
the linearizations can be computed as in the case µ = 0 and we obtain the following condition
for the appearance of a Turing instability:
3 (cid:48) ∗ 2 2 4 2
Dµ(cid:15) ρ u > Dµ(cid:15) δ + Dµ (cid:15) + µ(cid:15) ρ. (5.7)
2
δu∗
We insert u∗ = 1 and simplify for D (cid:29) 1 to
2 ρ((cid:15)u∗)
1
ρ(cid:48)((cid:15)u∗)(cid:15)u∗ µ
1 1 2
> 1 + (cid:15) . (5.8)
ρ((cid:15)u∗) δ
1
For small L respectively large (cid:15) the (cid:15)2 term is dominating, thus there is no instability. For
sufficiently large L the instability condition is satisfied if
(cid:48)
ρ (w)w > ρ(w) for all w > 0. (5.9)
16

Figure 10: Stationary concentrations for constant length L and varying neurite lengths L
1
and L .
2
Now we observe that (5.9) cannot be satisfied for linear ρ, since this would always imply the
opposite inequality for all w. Hence, some ultrasensitivity is needed to make the homogeneous
solution unstable at some length L.
We also see that with a quadratic atcivation the system can produce a length-dependent
Turing instability. Consider
2
ρ(w) = α + βw , (5.10)
then ρ(cid:48)(w) = 2β(cid:15)2w, hence instability can occur if
ρ(cid:48)(w)w 2βw2 −α + βw2
− 1 = − 1 = > 0. (5.11)
ρ(w) α + βw2 α + βw2
This is true in particular if α = 0.
6 Conclusions
We have studied the mathematical modelling of neuronal polarization focusing on an exper-
imentally observed feedback loop between PI3 kinase, Rac and Cdc42 and investigated the
model behaviour by numerical solutions in a setup with two neurites separated by the soma.
Our main conclusions are the following:
• A feedback loop in the activation of GTPases and PI3 kinase can lead to an inherent
polarization mechanism at critical length. However
• Some kind of ultrasensitivity is needed to produce instabilities leading to polarization,
the latter do not occur with simple linear reactions.
17

Figure 11: Stationary concentrations when varying the transport speed.
Figure 12: Stationary concentrations for constant length L and varying neurite lengths L
1
and L .
2
• Symmetry breaking as observed in experiments can be obtained by active anterograde
transport. This is however not specific to the transport of a particular species, and -
since the mathematical form for domain growth is analogous to the active transport
term - could even occur due to mechanical effects. Note the experiments of [15], which
lead to polarization caused by pulling on a neurite.
Our results suggest a variety of future questions to be solved. Of course our model is far
from being quantitative and the need for extensions as well as calibrations of model parameters
are to be clarified from experiments. The role of active transport during development is
another issue that calls for further experimental investigations.
From a mathematical point it is a challenging issue to characterize the existence of non-
trivial steady states in cases of Turing instability, which so far has been successful in only few
cases in literature (cf. [32, 33]), not for the mass-conserving model suggested here. An even
more challenging and fundamental question is to understand the effect of a transport term in
the equation and the detailed reasons for the symmetry breaking.
Acknowledgements
The work of AWP has been supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(SFB 629 and PU102/12-1).
18

References
[1] S.S.L.Andersen, G.Bi (2000), Axon formation: a molecular model for the generation of
neuronal polarity, BioEssays 22, 172-179.
[2] N.Arimura, K.Kaibuchi (2007). Neuronal Polarity: from extracellular signals to intracel-
lular mechanisms, Nature 8, 194-205.
[3] A.P.Barnes, F.Polleux (2009), Establishment of axon-dendrite polarity in developing
neurons 32, Ann. Rev. Neurosci., 347-381.
[4] F.Calderon de Anda, A.G¨artner, L.H.Tsai, C.G.Dotti (2008), Pyramidal neuron polarity
axis is defined at the bipolar stage, J. Cell Sci. 121, 178-185.
[5] C.G.Dotti, C.A.Sullivan, G.A.Banker GA (1988), The establishment of polarity by hip-
pocampal neurons in culture, J. Neurosci. 8, 1454-1468.
[6] S.Etienne-Manneville, A.Hall (2002), Rho-GTPases in cell biology, Nature, 420, 629-635.
[7] M.Fivaz (2008), Robust neuronal symmetry breaking by Ras- triggered local positive
feedback, Current Biol. 18, 44-50.
[8] A.B.Goryachev A.V.Pokhilko (2008), Dynamics of Cdc42 network embodies a Turing-
type mechanism of yeast cell polarity. FEBS Letters 582, 1437-1443.
[9] K.Goslin, G.Banker (1989), Experimental observations of the development of polarity by
hippocampal neurons in culture, J. Cell Biol. 108, 1507-1516.
[10] E.E.Govek, S.E.Newey, L.E.Van Aelst (2005), The role of the Rho GTPases in neuronal
development, Genes Dev. 19, 1-49.
[11] S.Ishihara, M.Otsuji, A.Mochizuki (2007), Transient and steady state of mass-conserved
reaction-diffusion systems, Phys. Rev. E 75, 015203.
[12] A.Jilkine, A.F.Maree, L.Edelstein-Keshet (2007), Mathematical model for spatial segre-
gation of the Rho-family GTPases based on inhibitory crosstalk. Bull. Math. Biol. 69,
1943-1978.
[13] A.Jilkine (2009), A wave-pinning mechanism for eukaryotic cell polarization based on
Rho-GTPase dynamics, PhD Thesis (UBC Vancouver).
[14] A.Jilkine, L.Edelstein-Keshet (2011), A comparison of mathematical models for polariza-
tion of single eukaryotic cells in response to guided cues. PLOS Comp. Biol. 7, e1001121.
[15] P.Lamoureux, G.Ruthel, R.E.Buxbaum, S.R.Heidemann (2002), Mechanical tension can
specify axonal fate in hippocampal neurons, J. Cell Biol. 159, 499-508.
[16] A.Lipshtat, G.Jayaraman, J.C.He, R.Iyengar (2009), Design of versatile biochemical
switches that respond to amplitude, duration, and spatial cues. PNAS 107, 1247- 1252.
[17] C.Menager, N.Arimura, Y.Fukata, K.Kaibuchi (2004), PIP3 is involved in neuronal po-
larization and axon formation, J. Neurochemistry 89, 109-118.
19

[18] Y.Mori, A.Jilkine, L.Edelstein-Keshet (2008), Wave-Pinning and cell polarity from a
bistable reaction-diffusion system, Biophys. J. 94, 3684-3697.
[19] Y.Mori, A.Jilkine, L.Edelstein-Keshet (2011), Asymptotic and bifurcation analysis of a
wave-based pattern formation mechanism in a model of cell polarization, SIAM J. Appl.
Math. 71, 1401-1427.
[20] Y.Morita, T.Ogawa (2010), Stability and bifurcation of nonconstant solutions to a
reaction-diffusion system with conservation of mass, Nonlinearity 23, 1347.
[21] M.Otsuji, S.Ishihara, C.Co, K.Kaibuchi, A.Mochizuki, S.Kuroda (2007), A mass-
conserved reaction-diffusion system captures properties of cell polarity, PLOS Comp.
Biol. 3, 1040-1054.
[22] M.Postma, P.J.M.Van Haastert (2001), A diffusion-translocation model for gadient sens-
ing by chemotactic cells, Biophys. J. 81, 1314-1323.
[23] A.J.Ridley (2001), Rho GTPases and cell migration, J. Cell Sci. 114, 2713-2722
[24] Y.Sakumura, Y.Tsukada, N.Yamamoto, S.Ishii (2005), A molecular model for axon guid-
ance based on cross talk between Rho GTPases, Biophys. J., 89, 812-822.
[25] D.C.Samuels, (1996), The Origin of neuronal polarization: a model of axon formation.
Phil. Transa. Royal Soc. Bio. Sci. 351, 1147-1156.
[26] J.C.Schwamborn, A.W.Pu¨schel (2004), The sequential activity of the GTPases Rap1B
and Cdc42 determines neuronal polarity. Nature Neurosci. 7, 923-929.
[27] K.K.Subramanian, A.Narang (2004), A mechanistic model for eukaryotic gradient sens-
ing: Spontaneous and induced phosphoinositide polarization, J. Theor. Biol. 231, 49-67.
[28] S.Tahirovic, F.Bradke (2009), Neuronal polarity, Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in
Biology 1, 1-17.
[29] M.Toriyama, T.Shimada, K.B.Kim, M.Mitsuba, E.Nomura, K.Katsuta, Y.Sakumura,
P.Roepstorff, N.Inagaki (2006), Shootin1: a protein involved in the organization of an
asymmetric signal for neuronal polarization, J. Cell Biol. 175, 147-157.
[30] M.Toriyama, Y.Sakumura, T.Shimada, S.Ishii, N.Inagaki (2010), A diffusion-based neu-
rite length-sensing mechanism involved in neuronal symmetry breaking. Molecular Sys-
tems Biology. 6, AN 394.
[31] M.Watabe-Uchida, E.E.Govek, L.Van Aelst, Regulators of Rho GTPases in neuronal
development, J. Neurosci. 26, 10633-10635.
[32] J.Wei, M.Winter (2001), Spikes for the two-dimensional Gierer-Meinhardt system: the
weak coupling case, J. Nonlinear Sci. 11, 415- 458
[33] M.Winter, J.Wei (2004), Stability analysis of Turing patterns generated by the Schnaken-
berg model, J. Math. Biol. 49, 358- 390
[34] H.Witte H. et al. (2008), Micotubule stabilization specifies initial neuronal polarization.,
J. Cell Biol. 11, 619-632.
20

[35] T.Yoshimura, N.Arimura, K.Kaibuchi (2006), Signaling networks in neuronal polariza-
tion, J. Neurosci. 26, 10626-10630
21