Particle Identification with the ALICE Transition Radiation Detector
Yvonne Pachmayera, for the ALICE Collaboration
aPhysikalisches Institut, University ofHeidelberg (Germany)
Abstract
TheTransitionRadiationDetector(TRD)providesparticleidentificationintheALICEcentralbarrel. Inparticular,itallowselectron
4102 beF 41  ]ted-sni.scisyhp[  1v8053.2041:viXra
identification via the measurement of transition radiation for p > 1 GeV/c, where pions can no longer be rejected sufficiently via
specific energy loss in the ALICE Time Projection Chamber. The ALICE TRD is uniquely designed to record the time evolution
of the signal, which allows even better electron/pion separation. In addition, the electron identification capability of the TRD can
be used on-line to trigger at level 1. The particle identification and its performance in pp, p-Pb and Pb–Pb collisions employing
various methods, such as truncated mean signal, one- and two-dimensionallikelihoodon integratedchargeand neural network, will
be presented. The measurement of J/ψ mesons in Pb–Pb collisions is given as a case study to show how well the TRD contributes
to physics analyses due to its excellent pion suppression.
Keywords: ALICE, TRD, Particle identification, Electron identification, Electron/pion separation
1. Introduction (TR) photon with an energy in the X-ray range is created per
traversing electron. The photons are detected in the Xe/CO
2
The ALICE Transition Radiation Detector (TRD) [1] per-
filled TRD chambers[3], wheretheydeposittheirenergyontop
forms electron identificationand triggers at level 1 on identified
of the ionization signals from the particle track. This contribu-
particles. It thus allows semi-leptonic decays of heavy-flavour
tion is visiblein Fig.1 at late drift times, because the absorption
35
hadrons, di-electronmass spectra of heavy quarkoniastates and
5 of the TR photon happens preferentially close to the radiator.
jets to be studied [2]. These observables are important probes
of the quark-gluonplasma created in heavy-ioncollisions at the
)Vm( thgieh eslup egarevA
LHC. For reference purposes the measurements are also per-
120 e dE/dx+TR
formed in pp and p-Pb collisions.
e dE/dx
TheALICE TRD consists of522chambersarrangedin6lay- π dE/dx
10 100
ers at a radial distance r (2.9 r 3.7 m) from the beam axis.
≤ ≤
Each chamber comprises a radiator and a gas detector with a
80
3 cm drift region and a 0.7 cm multi-wire proportional cham-
ber (MWPC) with amplification on anode wires. The signal
60
induced on the segmented cathode plane is read out and pro-
15
cessed in a custom-built charge-sensitive preamplifier-shaper
40
circuit and digitized by a 10 MHz ADC to sample the temporal
evolution of the signal. The induced charges are sampled every
20
100 ns. The front-end electronics are directly mounted on the p=2 GeV/c
back of each TRD chamber.
20
0
Figure 1 shows the respective recorded time evolution of the 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
 (µ 
Drift time s)
signal for electrons and pions with momenta of 2 GeV/c. The
peak at early times originates from the amplification region and
the plateau at intermediate times is due to the drift region. The Figure 1: Average pulse height vs drift time for pions and electrons (with and
without radiator). Theresults were obtained from testbeam measurements [4].
average pulse height is higher for electrons, because in this mo-
25
mentum region the specific energy loss of electrons is larger
Specific energy loss and TR measurements were performed
than that of pions.
in the βγ range 1 104 with (i) pions and electrons from test-
When relativistic electrons (γ & 800) travel through the ra- −
beam runs at CERN PS in 2004 [3], (ii) protons, pions and
diator, crossing the many boundaries between media with dif-
electrons in pp collisions at √s = 7 TeV [5] and (iii) muons de-
ferent dielectric constants, on average one Transition Radiation 40
30
tected in ALICE cosmic runs [6]. The latter experimentpermits
the measurement of both dE/dx + TR and dE/dx only signals in
the TRD by selecting cosmic tracks entering the TRD cham-
Emailaddress: pachmay@physi.uni-heidelberg.de (Yvonne
Pachmayer) bers from the radiator side or the opposite side, respectively.
Preprint submitted to NIM A July 9,2018

|    | None   |
|:---|:-------|
|    |        |

The dependence of the most probable signal on βγ is shown in
45 )stinu .bra( RT +xd/Ed DRTdleiY dezilamroN 6
Fig. 2. The onset of TR from cosmic muons is distinctly visible
and the TR signal from TeV muons is consistent with that from
5
GeV electrons in the other measurements. This allows refer-
ence distributions for particle identification with the TRD to be d
4
determined over a broad momentum range.
50
p
3
).u.a( langis DRT elbaborp tsom
ALICE TRD (Xe-CO  [85-15])
2.5 2 2 K
π
1
2
ALICE Performance 13/08/2013 p-Pb  s =5.02TeV
NN
0
1.5 0.4 0.5 0.6 1 2 3 4 5
p (GeV/c)
π, e, dE/dx (testbeam)
π, e, dE/dx+TR (testbeam)
1
p, π, e (pp  s=7 TeV) Figure 3: Truncated mean signals as a function of momentum for charged par-
µ, dE/dx (cosmic rays) ticles in minimum bias data from p-Pb collisions at √s = 5.02TeV [7].
µ, dE/dx+TR (cosmic rays)
0.5
fit, ALEPH parametrization
fit, ALEPH param. + logistic f.
19/08/2011 specific energy loss and transition radiation.
0  
1 10 102 103 104
βγ
In testbeam measurements at CERN PS in 2004, charge de-
posit distributions were recorded for electrons and pions in the
Figure 2: Most probable TRD signals from testbeam runs, pp collisions at
momentum range 1 to 10 GeV/c [4]. The respective charge de-
√s = 7 TeV and cosmic ray measurements [6]. 80
posit distributions describe the results from collision data well
(see Fig.4), andcan thusbe usedas referencesforparticle iden-
tification. Respective reference distributions for muons, kaons
andprotonswereobtainedviaparametrizationsfromGEANT3.
2. Particle Identification
The TRD provides particle identification on a track-by-track 0.2
basis. Several methods are in use: pp, 7 TeV:
0.18 p = 2.0 GeV/c
Pions
Electrons
0.16
Truncated mean signal,
55
• Testbeam 2004:
0.14
Pions
One-dimensional likelihood,
• 0.12 Electrons
Two-dimensional likelihood and 0.1
•
0.08
Neural network.
• 0.06
ALICE Performance
The truncated mean signal, the combined signal of specific 0.04 19/05/2011
ionization and transition radiation, is shown versus momentum 0.02 pp,  s = 7 TeV
60
in Fig. 3 for p-Pb collisions at √s = 5.02 TeV [7]. As can be
0
0 20 40 60 80 100
seen, this method allows identification of hadrons and light
TRD Signal (a. u.)
nuclei.
Figure 4: Total integrated charge measured in a single TRD chamber for elec-
The simplest dedicated electron identification method in use
65
tronsandpionsinppcollisions, incomparison withresultsfromtestbeam mea-
is the one-dimensional likelihood (LQ1D) on the total inte-
surements. In pp collisions, theelectrons and pions were selected via topologi-
grated charge measured in a single TRD chamber (tracklet) [5]. cal cuts fromphoton conversions and K0 decays, respectively.
s
Figure 4 shows the total charge measured in a single chamber
for electrons and pions in pp collisions at √s = 7 TeV. Clean Foreachparticlepassingthe TRD,likelihoodvaluesforelec-
85
samples of electrons and pions were obtained by selecting trons, pions, muons, kaons and protons are calculated for each
70
tracks originating from the decay γ e+e and K0 π+π , chamber using the reference distributions. Next the informa-
− s −
→ →
respectively, via topological cuts and particle identification tion of at least four TRD layers is combined via the Bayesian
with the Time Projection Chamber (TPC) and the Time-of- formula, providing global track particle identification.
Flight detector (TOF) in ALICE. The average charge deposit In the analysis, pions, i.e. hadrons, are then rejected in the
90
of electrons is higher than that of pions, because of the larger TRD by applyinga momentum-dependentcut on the likelihood
75
2

Figure 6: Momentum dependence of the pion efficiency. The
Figure 5: Pion efficiency versus electron efficiency for various
results are for tracks passing 6 layers of the TRD and satisfying
particle identification methods.
an electron efficiency of 90 %.
value for electrons, providing a specified electron efficiency. ods lacks necessary references for momenta above 4 GeV/c.
The cut was tuned and cross-checked by studying the clean The truncated mean signal method shows very good pion re-
reference sample of electrons from photon conversions. jection at low momenta, where the dE/dx measurement dom-
130
inates. Above, the rejection power decreases, because the TR
95
contribution, yielding higher charge deposits, is more likely to
The two-dimensional likelihood method (LQ2D) [8] and
be removed in the truncation.
the neural network (NN) [9] make use of the temporal evo-
lution of the TRD signal by splitting the signal, depicted in
Fig. 1, into two slices and into seven slices in time, respec-
3. TRD Electron Identification in Physics Analysis
tively. The references for the summed charges in both slices
100
as well as the training sample for the neural network were
An illustrative case for the application of the TRD electron
135
obtainedfromcleanelectronand pionsamples in collision data. identificationisthereconstructionofthedecayoftheJ/ψmeson
into an electron and a positron. Figure 7 shows the invariant
To quantify the electron/pion separation for the different mass distribution of e+e pairs in 0-40 % most central Pb–Pb
−
methods clean samples of electrons and pions are used. The collisions at √s = 2.76 TeV, identified by using the TPC
105 NN
pion efficiency, the fraction of pions incorrectly identified as only as well as the TPC and TRD combined.
140
electrons, is depicted in Fig. 5 as a function of electron effi- In both cases, the leptons with momenta p > 2 GeV/c were
ciency for all described methods. The results at 90 % electron identified through their specific energy loss in the TPC (in-
efficiency confirm the design values obtained in testbeam mea- clusion cut 1.5 σ,+3 σ). Furthermore a 3.5 σ and 4 σ
− ± ±
surements [4]. The LQ2D and NN methods significantly im- exclusion cut for pions and protons, respectively, was ap-
110
provethe pion suppression(the inverse of pion efficiency)com- plied. Afterbackgroundsubtraction,onefindsfortheTPC-only
145
pared with the LQ1D and truncated mean signal method, since case 2552 284 J/ψ candidates in the invariant mass region
±
these exploit the temporal evolution of the recorded TRD sig- 2.92-3.16 GeV/c2. The signal-to-backgroundratio is 0.033 and
nal. By sacrificing some electron efficiency an even improved the significance is 8.9.
pion rejection can be obtained for all methods. In the combined TPC+TRD case, the LQ2D method is addi-
115
The results shown in Fig. 5 are for tracks passing 6 layers of the tionallyappliedforelectronidentificationin theTRD byrequir-
150
TRD. With a decreasing number of tracklets, the pion rejection ingan electronlikelihoodof at least 0.7fortrackswith at least 4
factor decreases as expected [2]. tracklets. The strong discrimination power of the TRD leads to
The momentum dependence of the pion efficiency is shown in a clear reduction of combinatorial background in comparison
Fig. 6 for the various electron identification methods for tracks with the TPC-only analysis. The signal-to-background ratio
120
passing 6 layers of the TRD and satisfying an electron effi- increases by 30 %. The remaining combinatorial background
155
ciency of 90 %. For the LQ1D and LQ2D methods the pion ef- is dominated by electrons from photon conversion and semi-
ficiency decreases initially, because of the onset of TR produc- leptonic heavy-flavour decays. In the Pb–Pb run 2011 (data
tion (see Fig. 2). As expected,the pion suppressiongets weaker shown), the TRD covered 13/18 of the azimuthal angle. Thus
with further increasing momenta, because the TR production the TRD electron identification was used whenever available to
125
starts to saturate and the pion energy loss increases, making avoid signal loss. Despite the reduced coverage, the results al-
160
the electron/pion separation less efficient. The LQ2D meth- ready illustrate the strength of the TRD electron identification.
3

4. On-line Electron Identification 35000
2c/VeM 04 rep seirtne2c/VeM 04 rep seirtne TPC PID Pb-Pb  s =2.76 TeV
NN
30000 centrality: 0-40%
To significantly enrich samples of electrons originating from
2 < p  < 20 GeV/c
heavy-flavour decays and quarkonia, the TRD can be used to
25000 T
select events with electrons at trigger level 1 [10]. TRD Prob(e) > 0.7
165
In the front-end electronics, track segments (tracklets) are 20000 same event (SE)
mixed event (ME)
reconstructed locally and the total integrated charge is trans-
15000
formed into an electron likelihood using a look-up table. This TPC+TRD PID
10000
table was created from a clean sample of electrons and pions
from collision data (see Section 2). The information of at least
170 5000
4 layers is combined by averaging over the contributing track-
lets. For the trigger thresholdsare definedto achievea specified
800 TPC PID signal: 2522   284
electron efficiency. In addition, a threshold on the minimum
SE-ME S/B: 0.033
momentum, derived from a linear fit to all tracklets, can be set. 600
MC shape significance: 8.9
Gain variations on a pad-by-pad level are corrected and varia-
175 400
tions as a functionoftime due to pressurechangesare corrected
200
by high voltage adjustments. For an overview of the TRD trig-
ger see [10]. 0
The TRD electron trigger was successfully operated in
-200
pp collisions at √s = 8 TeV and p-Pb collisions at
180
√s = 5.02 TeV. The analysis of the recorded data is -400
NN
ongoing.
-600
2c/VeM 04 rep seirtne 800 TPC+TRD PID signal: 2351   239
5. Conclusion and Outlook S/B: 0.043
600
significance: 9.9
The TRD provides excellent particle identification and al- 400
lows the enhancement of rare probes due to its trigger capabil-
185 200
ities. It thus significantly expands the physics reach in ALICE.
The two-dimensionallikelihoodmethodandthe neuralnetwork 0
yield a pion suppression factor significantly better than 100 at
-200
an electron efficiency of 90 %, and thus reach the design value
-400
already obtained in testbeam measurements. The pion suppres-
190
sion fortheLQ2Dmethodis aboutafactortwobettercompared
-600
with the one-dimensionallikelihoodmethod, because of the us-
1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
age of the temporal evolution of the TRD signal. The latter
M(e+ e-) (GeV/c2)
method on the other hand is more simple and robust, because it
does not depend on the quality of the drift velocity and the time
195
offset calibration. The application of the TRD particle identifi-
Figure 7: Invariant mass distribution with TPC-only and TPC+TRD particle
cation algorithms in further analysis strategies, including both
identification for 0-40 % mostcentral Pb–Pb collisions.
electron and hadron identification methods, and the analysis of
TRD triggered data, are ongoing.
[5] M. Fasel, Single-electron analysis and open charm cross section in
215
proton-proton collisions at √s = 7 TeV, doctoral thesis, TU Darmstadt,
References October 2012.
200
[6] X. Lu [ALICE Collaboration], Energy loss signals in the
ALICE TRD, Nucl. Instrum. Meth A 706 (2013) 16–19.
References
doi:10.1016/j.nima.2012.05.015.
220
[7] X. Lu, Exploring the performance limits of the ALICE Time Projection
[1] ALICE Collaboration, A Transition Radiation Detector for Electron
Chamber and the Transition Radiation Detector for measuring identified
Identification within the ALICE Central Dector, CERN/LHCC 99-13,
hadron production at the LHC, doctoral thesis, Universitaet Heidelberg,
LHCC/P3-Addendum 2, 1999; ALICE Transition Radiation Detector
Germany, October 2013.
Technical Design Report, ALICETDR 9,CERN/LHCC 2001-021.
205 [8] D. Lohner, Anisotropic flow of direct photons in Pb–Pb collisions at
225
[2] Y. Pachmayer [ALICE Collaboration], Physics with the ALICE Tran-
√s = 2.76 TeV, doctoral thesis, Universitaet Heidelberg, Germany,
NN
sition Radiation Detector, Nucl. Instrum. Meth A 706 (2013) 6–11.
October 2013.
doi:10.1016/j.nima.2012.05.016.
[9] C. Adler et al. [ALICE TRD Collaboration], Electron/Pion Identification
[3] R. Bailhache and C. Lippmann [ALICE TRD Collaboration], New test
with ALICE TRD Prototypes using a Neural Network Algorithm, Nucl.
beam results with prototypes of the ALICE TRD,Nucl. Instrum. Meth A
210 Instrum. Meth. A 552 (2005) 364–371.
230
563 (2006) 310–313. doi:10.1016/j.nima.2006.02.157.
[10] J. Klein [ALICE Collaboration], Triggering with the AL-
[4] A. Andronic et al. [ALICE TRD Collaboration], Electron identification
ICE TRD, Nucl. Instrum. Meth A 706 (2013) 23–28.
performance with ALICE TRD prototypes, Nucl. Instrum. Meth A 522
doi:10.1016/j.nima.2012.05.011.
(2004) 40–44. doi:10.1016/j.nima.2004.01.015.
4

| 35000                  |
| TPC PID 2c/VeM         |
| 30000                  |
| 25000 04               |
| rep                    |
| 20000                  |
| seirtne                |
| 15000                  |
| TPC+TRD PID            |
| 10000                  |
| 5000                   |
|:-----------------------|
| 800 TPC PID 2c/VeM     |
| SE-ME                  |
| 600                    |
| MC shape               |
| 400 04                 |
| rep                    |
| 200                    |
| seirtne                |
| 0                      |
| -200                   |
| -400                   |
| -600                   |
| 800 TPC+TRD PID 2c/VeM |
| 600                    |
| 04                     |
| 400                    |
| rep                    |
| 200                    |
| seirtne                |
| 0                      |
| -200                   |
| -400                   |
| -600                   |
| 1.5 2 2.5 3            |