Equilibria in a large production economy
with an infinite dimensional commodity space
and price dependent preferences∗
0202 beF 5  ]HT.noce[  2v44470.4091:viXra
Hyo Seok Jang† Sangjik Lee‡
February 6, 2020
Abstract
We prove the existence of a competitive equilibrium in a production economy with infinitely
many commodities and a measure space of agents whose preferences are price dependent.
We employ a saturated measure space for the set of agents and apply recent results for an
infinite dimensional separable Banach space such as Lyapunov’s convexity theorem and an
exact Fatou’s lemma to obtain the result.
JEL Classification Numbers: C62, D51.
Keywords: Separable Banach space, Saturated measure space, Price dependent preferences,
Lyapunov’s convexity theorem, Fatou’s lemma
1 Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to prove the existence of a competitive equilibrium in a production
economy with infinitely many commodities and a measure space of agents whose preferences are
price dependent. In a seminal paper, Aumann [3] demonstrated the existence of a competitive
equilibrium for an exchange economy with a finite dimensional commodity space and a contin-
uum of agents modeled as an atomless finite measure space by utilizing Lyapunov’s convexity
theorem to dispense with convex preferences. Aumann’s model in [3] was generalized to allow
incomplete preferences by Schmeidler [35] and to include production by Hildenbrand [15].
As Shafer[36]1 and Balasko [5] pointed out, price dependent preferences have been tradition-
ally explained by consumers taking relative prices as an indication of quality. In addition, we
∗We thank two anonymous referees for their comments and suggestions. This research was supported by
Hankuk University of Foreign Studies Research Fund.
†Department of Mathematical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. Email:
hyoseok.jang@snu.ac.kr
‡Division of Economics, Hankuk University of Foreign Studies, Seoul, Korea. Email: slee@hufs.ac.kr.
1
This was drawn to our attention by an anonymous referee.
1

see other applications of price dependent preferences in the literature: Shafer [36] showed the
possibility of relating price dependent preferences to non-transitive preferences and Balasko [6]
demonstrated the equivalence of a temporary financial equilibrium model with an Arrow-Debreu
economy where preferences are price dependent.
Greenberg et al. [12] first proved the existence of a competitive equilibrium in a large economy
with price dependent preferences and a finite number of commodities. In [12], the authors
considered a large production economy with non-convex preferences. They reformulated the
production economy as a three-person game and applied Debreu’s social equilibrium existence
theorem to obtain a Walrasian equilibrium. In their proof, they applied Lyapunov’s convexity
theorem and Fatou’s Lemma in several dimensions. In order to utilize Fatou’s lemma, Greenberg
et al. [12] assumed the compactness of the consumption sets, which differs from Aumann’s
original model. Liu [29] dealt with a coalition production economy based on Greenberg et al.
[12].
For infinite dimensional commodity spaces, Khan and Yannelis [27] considered a large ex-
change economy and showed the existence of a competitive equilibrium. In [27], the commodity
space is an ordered separable Banach space whose positive cone has a non-empty interior. Until
recently, Lyapunov’s convexity theorem and an exact Fatou’s lemma for an infinite dimensional
separable Banach space were not available. Therefore, the authors had to impose the assumption
of convex preferences. They relied on the weak compactness of feasible allocations to extract
a convergent subsequence of competitive equilibria for truncated subeconomies to obtain the
existence of a Walrasian equilibrium. Now that the necessary mathematical tools are at hand, it
is natural to ask as to whether equilibrium existence results for a large economy with an infinite
dimensional commodity space, non-convex preferences and price externalities are available. We
give a positive answer in this paper.
Saturated or super-atomless measure spaces have played an important role in recent mathe-
matical economics. Podczeck [33] and Sun and Yannelis [37] successfully proved the convexity of
Bochner integrals of an infinite dimensional separable Banach space valued correspondence on
a saturated measure space. Based on saturated measure spaces, Khan and Sagara [21] proved
Lyapunov’s convexity theorem for vector measures taking values in an infinite dimensional sep-
arable Banach space and Greinecker and Podczeck [13] also showed it. Khan and Sagara [22]
established an exact Fatou’s lemma for an infinite dimensional separable Banach space. Khan
et al. [25] proved an exact Fatou lemma for Gelfand integrals which was also established via
Young measures by Greinecker and Podczeck [14]. These results have already been applied to
general equilibrium theory in several papers; see Khan and Sagara [23, 24], Khan and Suzuki
[26] and Lee [28]. In [24], the authors emphasized the importance of saturated measures by
saying that “the significance of the saturation property lies in the fact that it is necessary and
sufficient for the weak/weak* compactness and the convexity of the Bochner/Gelfand integral
2

of a multifunction as well as the Lyapunov convexity theorem in separable Banach spaces/their
dual spaces.”
In this paper, we consider a large production economy whose commodity space is that of Khan
and Yannelis [27] and whose agents have non-convex and price dependent preferences, similar
to Greenberg et al. [12]. We employ a saturated measure space of agents and hence, we can
utilize the convexity of a Bochner integral of a Banach space valued correspondence, Lyapunov’s
convexity theorem, and the exact Fatou’s lemma for an infinite dimensional Banach space. With
these new results, we are able to relax the convexity of preferences and production sets, and
apply Debreu’s social equilibrium existence theorem. Moreover, we can obtain a competitive
equilibrium as the limit of a sequence of competitive equilibria for truncated subeconomies. We
dispense with the uniform compactness assumption on the consumption sets and production
sets, which was used in [12] and in [29].
The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 contains notations and definitions. We present
our model in Section 3, and our main and auxiliary results are in Section 4. The proof of the
auxiliary result is in Section 5 followed by the proof of the main theorem in Section 6. Section
7 concludes the paper with our remarks.
2 Notation and Definitions
Let X,Y be topological spaces. A set-valued function or a correspondence F from Y to the
family of non-empty subsets of Y is called upper semicontinuous if the set {x : X : F(x) ⊂ V }
is open in X and said to be lower semicontinuous if the set {x : X : F(x) ∩ V 6= ∅} is open
in X for every V of Y . When Y is a Banach space, F is norm upper semicontinuous if the set
{x : X : F(x) ⊂ V } is open in X for every norm open subset V of Y . And F is called weakly
upper semicontinuous if the set {x : X : F(x) ⊂ V } is open in X for every weakly open subset
V of Y . We say that F is norm lower semicontinuous if the set {x : X : F(x) ∩ V 6= ∅} is open
in X for every norm open subset V of Y and F is said to be weakly lower semicontinuous if the
set {x : X : F(x) ∩ V 6= ∅} is open in X for every weakly open subset V of Y .
Let (T,T ,µ) be a finite measure space and E be a Banach space. A measurable function
f : (T,T ,µ) → E is said to be Bochner integrable if there exists a sequence of simple functions
{f } such that
n n∈N
lim kf (t) − f(t)kdµ = 0 (2.1)
n
n→∞Z
T
N
where denotes the set of natural numbers. For each S ∈ T the integral is defined to be
f(t)dµ = lim f (t)dµ. Denote by L1(µ,E) the space of (the equivalence classes of)
n→∞ n
S S
R R
E-valued Bochner integrable functions f : T → E normed by kfk = kf(t)kdµ.
1 T
R
3

The weak upper limit of a sequence {S } of subsets in E is defined by
n
N
w-Ls S = {x ∈ E : ∃{x } such that x = w-limx ,x ∈ S , for all k ∈ } (2.2)
n nk nk nk nk
where {x } is a subsequence of a sequence {x } and w-lim x denotes the weak limit point
nk n n nk
of {x }.
nk
E
A correspondence F : T → 2 is said to be measurable if for every open subset V of E, the set
{t ∈ T : F(t)∩V 6= ∅} ∈ T . The correspondence F is said to have a measurable graph if its graph
G = {(t,x) ∈ T ×E : x ∈ F(t)} belongs to the product σ-algebra T ⊗B(E,w), where B(E,w)
F
denotes the Borel σ-algebra of E generated by the weak topology. If correspondences from T
to E are closed valued, measurability and graph measurability are equivalent when (T,T ,µ) is
complete and E is separable.2 A measurable correspondence F : T → 2E is integrably bounded if
there exists a real-valued integrable function h on (T,T ,µ) such that sup{kxk : x ∈ F(t)} ≤ h(t)
for almost all t ∈ T.
A measurable function f from (T,T ,µ) to E is called a measurable selection of the corre-
spondence F if f(t) ∈ F(t) for almost all t ∈ T. By Aumann’s measurable selection theorem in
[4], if (T,T ,µ) is a complete finite measure space, F has a measurable graph, and E is separable,
then F has a measurable selection. We denote by S1 the set of all E-valued Bochner integrable
F
selections for the correspondence F, i.e., S1 = {f ∈ L1(µ,E) : f(t) ∈ F(t) a.e. t ∈ T}. When
F
F is also integrably bounded, it admits a Bochner integrable selection so that S1 is non-empty.
F
The integral of the correspondence F is defined by
1
F(t)dµ = { f(t)dµ : f ∈ S }. (2.3)
F
Z Z
T T
A sequence of correspondences {F } from T to E is said to be well-dominated if there
n
E
exists an integrably bounded and weakly compact-valued correspondence φ : T → 2 such that
F (t) ⊂ φ(t) a.e. t ∈ T for each n.
n
Let E be an ordered Banach space equipped with ordering ≥ such that the positive cone
E = {x ∈ E : x ≥ 0} of E is closed. For x,y ∈ E, x > y means x − y ∈ E and x 6= y. We
+ +
denote by E∗ the dual space of E, i.e., the space of all continuous linear functionals from E into
R . For x ∈ E,p ∈ E∗, we write p · x for the value of p at x. We denote by E∗ the dual cone of
+
E , i.e., E∗ = {p ∈ E∗ : p·x ≥ 0 for all x ∈ E }. We denote by B(E∗,w∗) the Borel σ-algebra
+ + +
of E∗ generated by the weak* topology. For any set A in E, clA stands for the norm closure of
A and coA for the convex hull of A.
Let (T,T ,µ) be a finite measure space. Denote by L1(µ) the the space of (µ-equivalence
classes of) real valued integrable functions on T. Let T = {A ∩ S|A ∈ T } be the sub-σ-algebra
S
of T restricted to S ∈ T and µ be a restriction of µ to T . We write L1(µ) for the vector
S S S
2
See Theorem 8.1.4 in [2].
4

subspace of L1(µ) which consists of each function in L1(µ) restricted to S.
Definition 1. A finite measure space (T,T ,µ) is saturated if L1(µ) is non-separable for every
S
S ∈ T with µ(S) > 0.
A saturated measure space is also called “super-atomless” in Podczeck [33]. Other equivalent
definitions for saturation are available in the literature; see [10], [11], [17], [20], and [33]. As men-
tioned in Khan and Sagara [24], “a germinal notion of saturation already appeared in [19, 30],”
and Kakutani [19] constructed a non-separable extension of the Lebesgue measure space which
can be seen as a saturated extension of the Lebesgue interval.3 Examples of saturated measure
κ κ
spaces include the product spaces of the form [0,1] and {0,1} , where κ is an uncountable car-
dinal, [0,1] is endowed with the Lebesgue measure and {0,1} the fair coin flipping measure. The
cardinalities of these two examples are greater than the continuum. Podczeck [33] constructed a
saturated measure structure on the unit interval by “enriching” the Lebesgue σ-algebra. Thus,
as is pointed out in [33], when we have a saturated measure space of agents, the cardinality of
the set of agents is not necessarily larger than the continuum.
3 The Model
The commodity space E is an ordered separable Banach Space with an interior point v in E .4
+
For the space of agents, we employ a complete probability space (T,T ,µ) which is saturated.
Let X be a correspondence from T to E . The consumption set of agent t ∈ T is given by
+
X(t) ⊂ E . The initial endowment of each agent is given by a Bochner integrable function
+
e : T → E where e(t) ∈ X(t) for all t ∈ T. The aggregate initial endowment is e(t)dµ. Let Y
T
R
be a correspondence from T to E. The production set of agent t is given by Y (t) ⊂ E. A price is
p ∈ E∗ \{0}. Let ∆ = {p ∈ E∗ \{0} : p·v = 1} be the price space. Then by Alaoglu’s theorem, ∆
+ +
is weak* compact. Let E = [(T,T ,µ),(X(t),Y (t),U ,e(t)) ] be a production economy where
t t∈T
R
U : X(t) × ∆ → represents agent t’s utility function. We also write U(t,x,p) = U (x,p) for
t t
t ∈ T, x ∈ X(t) and p ∈ ∆. An allocation for E is a Bochner integrable function f : T → E such
+
that f ∈ S1 and a production plan is a Bochner integrable function g : T → E such that g ∈ S1 .
X Y
The budget set of agent t at a price p ∈ ∆ is B(t,p) = {x ∈ X(t) : p·x ≤ p·e(t)+max p·Y (t)}.
A competitive equilibrium for E is a triple of a price p, an allocation f and a production
plan g such that
1. p · f(t) ≤ p · e(t) + p · g(t) for almost all t ∈ T,
2. f(t)dµ ≤ e(t)dµ + g(t)dµ,
T T T
R R R
3
We are grateful to an anonymous referee for drawing our attention to Kakutani [19].
4
The examples of this space include C(K), the set of bounded continuous functions on a Hausdorff compact
metric space K equipped with sup norm and a weakly compact subset of L (µ) where µ is a finite measure.
∞
5

3. for any x ∈ X(t), U (x,p) > U (f(t),p) implies that p · x > p · e(t) + p · g(t) for almost all
t t
t ∈ T,
4. p · g(t) = max p · Y (t) for almost all t ∈ T.
We assume that the production economy E satisfies the following assumptions:
A.1 X(t) is non-empty, closed, convex, integrably bounded and weakly compact for all t ∈ T.
A.2 Y (t) is non-empty, closed, integrably bounded and weakly compact for all t ∈ T.
A.3 There is an element η(t) ∈ X(t) such that e(t) − η(t) is in the norm interior of E for all
+
t ∈ T.
R
A.4 (i) U : X(t) × ∆ → is a jointly continuous function on X(t) × ∆ for all t ∈ T where
t
X(t) is equipped with the weak topology and ∆ with the weak* topology. (ii) If x ∈ X(t)
is a satiation point for U (·,p), then x ≥ e(t) + y for any y ∈ Y (t); if x ∈ X(t) is not
t
a satiation point for U (·,p), then x belongs to the weak closure of the set {x′ ∈ X(t) :
t
U (x′,p) > U (x,p)} for every p ∈ ∆.
t t
A.5 U is jointly measurable with respect to T ⊗ B(E,w) ⊗ B(E∗,w∗).
E
A.6 the correspondence X : T → 2 has a measurable graph, i.e., G ∈ T ⊗ B(E,w).
X
E
A.7 the correspondence Y : T → 2 has a measurable graph, i.e., G = {(t,y) ∈ T × E : y ∈
Y
Y (t)} ∈ T ⊗ B(E,w).
A.8 0 ∈ Y (t) for all t ∈ T where 0 is the zero vector of E.
In A.1 and A.2, we assume that both the consumption sets and the production sets are
weakly compact. Although these assumptions seem strong, the weakly compact consumption
set assumption was employed in Khan and Yannelis [27], Podczeck [32] and Khan and Sagara
[24].5 With this assumption, Khan and Yannelis [27] made the set of feasible allocations weakly
compact, Podczeck [32] obtained a weakly compact-valued demand correspondence, and Khan
and Sagara [24] were able to invoke the exact Fatou’s lemma for an infinite dimensional separable
Banach space. We use the weak compactness assumption to apply the exact Fatou’s lemma for
our results. A.4 (ii) is imposed in [24, 28, 32] and the second part plays a similar role to the
“local nonsatiation” assumption.
5
Since these three papers dealt with exchange economies, the production sets are irrelevant.
6

4 Results
The following theorem is our main result:
Main Theorem. Suppose that the production economy E satisfies A.1-A.8. Then there exists
a competitive equilibrium for E.
The proof of the Main Theorem is provided in Section 6. As is well known, for x ∈ E and
p ∈ ∆ the bilinear map (p,x) 7→ p · x is not jointly continuous if E is equipped with the weak
topology and ∆ with the weak* topology. But when E is equipped with the norm topology, the
bilinear map is continuous.6 To utilize this property, we modify A.1 and A.2:
A.1′ X(t) is non-empty, closed, convex, integrably bounded and norm compact for all t ∈ T.
A.2′ Y (t) is non-empty, closed, integrably bounded and norm compact for all t ∈ T.
We now introduce the following auxiliary result:
Auxiliary Theorem. Suppose that the production economy E satisfies A.1′, A.2′ and A.3-A.8.
Then there exists a competitive equilibrium for E.
We provide the proof of the Auxiliary Theorem in Section 5. We follow the idea of [12] for
the proof of the Auxiliary Theorem. Greenberg et al. [12] applied Debreu’s [8] social equilibrium
result to prove the existence of a competitive equilibrium.
We introduce a 3-person game Γ which consists of three sets K ,K ,K , and three corre-
1 2 3
2K1,A 2K2,A 2K3,
spondence A : K × K → : K × K → : K × K → and three functions
1 2 3 2 1 3 3 1 2
R
u : K ×K ×K → (i = 1,2,3). Let I = {1,2,3} and let K = Π K (i,j ∈ I). We write
i 1 2 3 −i j6=i j
k for an element in K and k for K .
i i −i −i
An equilibrium for Γ is k∗ ∈ K × K × K such that for all i ∈ I
1 2 3
∗ ∗
k ∈ argmax u (k ,k ). (4.1)
i ki∈Ai(k −∗ i) i i −i
The following lemma is Debreu’s [8] social equilibrium theorem for a Banach space.
Lemma 1. Let Γ be a 3-person game and suppose Γ satisfies, for i ∈ I,
(i) K is a non-empty, convex, and compact subset of a Banach space;
i
(ii) A is continuous, non-empty, closed and convex valued;
i
(iii) u is continuous and quasi-concave on K .
i i
Then Γ has an equilibrium.
6
See Aliprantis and Border [1] pp. 241-242.
7

Proof. By applying a standard argument to our Banach space, we can have the result.
Based on Lemma 1, we will prove the Auxiliary Theorem. Toward this end, we specify our
Γ. Without loss of generality, we assume the values of U are contained in [0,1] for all t ∈ T.
t
Let K = ∆, K = X(t)dµ×[0,1], and K = Y (t)dµ. For p ∈ K ,(x,α) ∈ K and y ∈ K ,
1 2 T 3 T 1 2 3
R R
let A ((x,α),y) = K , A (p,y) = {(x,α) ∈ K : ∃f ∈ S1 such that x = f(t)dµ,f(t) ∈
1 1 2 2 X T
R
B(t,p) a.e t ∈ T,α = U (f(t),p)dµ}, A (p,(x,α)) = K , and
T t 3 3
R
u (p,(x,α),y) = p · (x − e(t)dµ − y), u (p,(x,α),y) = α, u (p,(x,α),y) = p · y. (4.2)
1 2 3
Z
T
Lemma 2. Under A.1′ and A.2′, X(t)dµ and Y (t)dµ are norm compact and convex.
T T
R R
Proof. By appealing to Proposition 1 in Sun and Yannelis [37], we have the results.
Lemma 3. B(t,p) is a non-empty and continuous correspondence in p when X(t) and Y (t) are
norm compact and ∆ is weak* compact.
Proof. By A.8, it is clear that max p · Y (t) ≥ 0. Then η(t) ∈ B(t,p) for any p ∈ ∆. Therefore,
B(t,p) is non-empty.
R
Let ψ : ∆ → be a function defined by ψ (p) = max p·y. By Berge’s theorem, ψ (p)
t t y∈Y(t) t
R
is continuous in p. We define a function z : ∆ → by
t
z (p) = p · e(t) + max p · Y (t) = p · e(t) + ψ (p). (4.3)
t t
Clearly, z (p) is continuous in p. The budget correspondence can be rewritten as B(t,p) = {x ∈
t
X(t) : p · x ≤ z (p)}. By A.3 and A.8, z (p) > 0 for all p ∈ ∆. Then a standard argument can
t t
be adopted to show that B(t,p) is continuous in p.
The following is the exact Fatou’s lemma for Banach spaces proved by Khan and Sagara
[22].
Lemma 4 (Theorem 3.5 in [22]). Let (T,T ,µ) be a complete saturated finite measure space
and E be a Banach space. If {f } is a well-dominated sequence in L1(µ,E), then there exists
n
f ∈ L1(µ,E) such that
(i) f(t) ∈ w-Ls{f (t)} a.e. t ∈ T,
n
(ii) fdµ ∈ w-Ls{ f dµ}.
n
R R
Lemma 5. Under A.1′ and A.2′, A is continuous, non-empty, closed and convex valued for
i
i = 1,2,3.
8

Proof. We adopt the idea of the proof from [12]. It is clear that K = ∆ is non-empty and
1
convex. By Alaoglu’s theorem, it is weak* compact and thus, weak* closed. It follows that A
1
is non-empty, closed and convex valued. From A.8, 0 ∈ Y (t)dµ and thus K = Y (t)dµ is
T 3 T
R R
non-empty. By Lemma 2, Y (t)dµ is convex and norm compact and thus, norm closed. Hence,
T
R
A is non-empty, closed and convex valued. Clearly, A and A are continuous.
3 1 3
We now turn to A . Since the initial endowment map e(t) ∈ B(t,p), A is non-empty. Note
2 2
e(t)dµ ∈ X(t)dµ for all t ∈ T and U (e(t),p)dµ ∈ [0,1]. Thus, K = X(t)dµ×[0,1] is
T T T t 2 T
R R R R
non-empty. By Lemma 2, X(t)dµ is norm compact and convex. It follows that K is compact
T 2
R
and convex.
We show the value of A is closed. We need to show (x,α) ∈ A (p,y) when x → x in norm
2 2 n
and α → α such that (x ,α ) ∈ A (p,y) for all n. Then there exists a sequence {f } ⊂ S1
n n n 2 n X
such that x = f (t)dµ and α = U (f (t),p)dµ with f (t) ∈ B(t,p) for all n. By virtue
n n n t n n
T T
R R
of A.1′, {f } is well-dominated. We can appeal to Lemma 4 to have f ∈ L1(µ,E) such that
n
f(t) ∈ X(t), f(t) ∈ w-Ls{f (t)} for a.e. t ∈ T, and f(t)dµ ∈ w-Ls{ f dµ}. Thus we can
n n
T
R R
extract a subsequence from {f } (which we do not relabel) such that f (t) → f(t) weakly for a.e.
n n
t ∈ T and f (t)dµ → f(t)dµ weakly. Since B(t,p) is norm compact and f (t) ∈ B(t,p)
n n
T T
R R
for all n, it follows f(t) ∈ B(t,p). The weak limit f(t)dµ of the subsequence of {x } must
n
T
R
be equal to the norm limit x of the whole sequence {x }. Because U (·,p) is weakly continuous,
n t
U (f (t),p) → U (f(t),p) for a.e. t ∈ T. On the other hand, let g (t) = U (f (t),p). Then from
t n t n t n
the boundedness of U, the sequence of functions {g } is well-dominated. Lemma 4 implies that
n
there exists g ∈ L1(µ) such that g (t) → g(t) for a.e. t ∈ T and α = g (t)dµ → g(t)dµ
n n n
T T
R R
up to subsequence. Hence g(t) = U (f(t),p) for a.e. t ∈ T and α = lim α = g(t)dµ =
t n n
T
R
U (f(t),p)dµ.
t
T
R
Next, we show the upper semicontinuity of A . Since K is compact, in order to prove A
2 2 2
is upper semicontinuous, it is sufficient to show that the graph of A is closed. Let p → p in
2 n
the weak* topology and y → y in the norm topology. We want to show that (x,α) ∈ A (p,y)
n 2
when x → x in norm and α → α with (x ,α ) ∈ A (p ,y ) for all n. There exists {f } such
n n n n 2 n n n
that x = f (t)dµ and α = U (f (t),p )dµ with f (t) ∈ B(t,p ) for a.e t ∈ T for all n.
n n n t n n n n
T T
R R
Clearly {f } is well-dominated.
n
Let g (t) = U (f (t),p ) and φ (t) = (f (t),g (t)). Then it is clear that {g } and {φ }
n t n n n n n n n
are both well-dominated. Consequently, there exists an integrable function φ on T such that
φ(t) ∈ w-Ls{φ (t)} a.e. t ∈ T and φdµ ∈ w-Ls{ φ dµ} by Lemma 4, where φ(t) =
n n
T T
R R
(f(t),g(t)) for some f ∈ L1(µ,E) and g ∈ L1(µ) with f(t) ∈ X(t) and g(t) ∈ R . Then
we can extract a convergent subsequence {φ } (we do not relabel) such that φ (t) → φ(t)
n n
weakly for a.e. t ∈ T and φ (t)dµ → φ(t)dµ weakly. So we have f (t) → f (t) weakly
n n n
T T
R R
for a.e. t ∈ T , g (t) → g(t) weakly for a.e. t ∈ T , f (t)dµ → f(t)dµ weakly and
n n
T T
R R
α = g (t)dµ → g(t)dµ.
n n
T T
R R
9

Because x = f (t)dµ converges to x in norm, f(t)dµ = x. By the joint continuity of
n n
T T
R R
U , U (f (t),p ) → U (f(t),p) for a.e. t ∈ T. Hence, we have g(t) = U (f(t),p) a.e. t ∈ T and
t t n n t t
U (f(t),p)dµ = g(t)dµ = lim α = α.
t n n
T T
R R
Now it remains to show f(t) ∈ B(t,p). Because X(t) is norm compact, f (t) converges up to
n
subsequence to some limit in norm, which must be equal to f(t). It follows that for a.e. t ∈ T,
p · f (t) → p · f(t). Since p · f (t) ≤ p · e(t) + max p · Y (t), we have
n n n n n n
p · f(t) ≤ p · e(t) + max p · Y (t). (4.4)
Therefore, f(t) ∈ B(t,p) for almost all t ∈ T. In sum, we showed that A is norm upper
2
semicontinuous.
We now prove the lower semicontinuity of A . Suppose (x,α) ∈ A (p,y). In order to show A
2 2 2
is lower semicontinuous, it suffices to find a sequence (x ,α ) such that (x ,α ) ∈ A (p ,y )
n n n n 2 n n
converging to (x,α) in norm. Since (x,α) ∈ A (p,y), there exists a function f such that
2
x = f(t)dµ and α = U (f(t),p). Notice that since for any p ∈ ∆, B(t,p) is a norm closed
t
T T
R R
subset of X(t), it is norm compact. Clearly it is convex.
Consider p → p in the weak* topology and, y → y in the norm topology. Note that
n n
B(t,p ) is convex and norm compact. Thus one can choose f (t) from B(t,p ) such that f (t)
n n n n
is the closest to f(t), i.e.,
kf (t) − f(t)k ≤ kz − f(t)k for all z ∈ B(t,p ). (4.5)
n n
We will show that f is measurable. Note that B(·,p) has a measurable graph. To see this,
n
we adopt [27]. For p ∈ ∆, define ξ : T ×E → [−∞,∞] by ξ (t,x) = p·x−p·e(t)−max p·Y (t).
p p
By Proposition 3 in [16] (p.60), max p · Y (t) is measurable in t. Then ξ is measurable in t and
p
continuous in x. By Proposition 3.1 in [39], ξ (·,·) is jointly measurable. Notice that
p
−1
G = {(t,x) ∈ T × X(t) : p · x ≤ p · e(t) + max p · Y (t)} = ξ ([−∞,0]) ∩ G (4.6)
B(·,p) p X
and thus the budget correspondence B(·,p) is graph measurable given p.
n N
By Castaing’s Representation Theorem in [39], there exists {h (t) : m ∈ } whose norm
m
closure is B(t,p ). Let
n
n n
Ψ (t) = {z ∈ B(t,p ) : kz − f(t)k ≤ kh (t) − f(t)k} (4.7)
m n m
and
n ∞ n
Ψ (t) ≡ ∩ Ψ (t). (4.8)
m=1 m
n
From the fact that B(t,p) is norm compact and the continuity of k·k, it follows that Ψ (t) is a
m
n E
non-empty measurable correspondence. Then the correspondence Ψ : T → 2 has a measurable
10

n N
graph. Since the set {h (t) : m ∈ } is dense in B(t,p ), only the closest point f (t) to f(t)
m n n
n n
belongs to Ψ (t). Therefore Ψ is a measurable function which is equal to f for µ−almost all
n
t ∈ T. Hence, f is measurable for all n. It is now clear that f ∈ S1 for all n.
n n X
We will show that f (t)dµ → f(t)dµ in norm. Let ε > 0. Pick b ∈ B(t,p) ∩ N (f(t))
n ε
T T
R R
where N (f(t)) is a neighborhood of f(t) with the radius ε. Suppose b ∈/ B(t,p ) for infinitely
ε n
many n. Then
p · b > p · e(t) + max p · Y (t). (4.9)
n n n
For some ε ∈ (0,1), we have
p · εb > p · e(t) + max p · Y (t). (4.10)
n n n
As n → ∞, it follows
p · εb ≥ p · e(t) + max p · Y (t) (4.11)
which contradicts b ∈ B(t,p).
Thus, there is a n¯ such that b ∈ B(t,p ) for all n ≥ n¯. Because of the minimizing prop-
n
erty (4.5) of f (t) in B(t,p ), we have kf (t) − f(t)k < ε. So lim U (f (t),p )dµ =
n n n n→∞ t n n
T
R
U (f(t),p)dµ. And the Dominated Convergence Theorem 7 in [9] says
t
T
R
lim kf (t) − f(t)kdµ = 0. (4.12)
n
n→∞Z
T
Let x = f (t)dµ and α = U (f (t),p )dµ. Then (x ,α ) ∈ A (p ,y ) for all n ≥ n¯.
n T n n T t n n n n 2 n n
R R
Moreover,
kx − xk = f (t)dµ − f(t)dµ ≤ kf (t) − f(t)kdµ → 0. (4.13)
n n n
(cid:13)Z Z (cid:13) Z
(cid:13) T T (cid:13) T
(cid:13) (cid:13)
(cid:13) (cid:13)
The last inequality comes from Theorem 4 in [9] (p.46). Hence, x → x in norm and α → α.
n n
It follows that A is norm lower semicontinuous.
2
We will show that A is convex valued. Pick (x,α) ∈ A (p,y) and (x′,α′) ∈ A (p,y). Then
2 2 2
there is a function f : T → E such that f(t)dµ = x and U (f(t),p)dµ = α with f(t) ∈
t
T T
R R
B(t,p) a.e. t and a function f′ : T → E such that f′(t)dµ = x′ and U (f′(t),p)dµ = α′
t
T T
R R
with f′(t) ∈ B(t,p) a.e t. Let Z = E × R and we define a function h : T → Z by h(t) =
(f(t),U (f(t),p)) and a function h′ : T → Z by h′(t) = (f′(t),U (f′(t),p)). It is clear that
t t
h,h′ ∈ L1(µ,Z). Let ν be a measure defined by
′
ν(S) = ( h(t)dµ, h (t)dµ) (4.14)
Z Z
S S
for S ∈ T . Notice that ν(∅) = ((0,0),(0,0)) and ν(T) = ((x,α),(x′,α′)). It follows from
Theorem 4.1 in [21] (Lyapunov’s convexity theorem) that the range of ν is convex. Thus there
7
See Theorem 3 in [9] p. 45.
11

exists S ∈ T such that ν(S) = λν(T) = ((λx,λα),(λx′,λα′)) for λ ∈ (0,1). Let f = fχ +
λ S
f′χ . Then f (t)dµ = f(t)dµ + f′(t)dµ = λx + (1 − λ)x′ and U (f(t),p)dµ +
T\S T λ S T\S S t
R R R R
U (f′(t),p)dµ = λα + (1 − λ)α′. It is clear that f (t) ∈ B(t,p). Therefore, A is a convex
T\S t λ 2
R
valued correspondence.
Lemma 6. Γ has an equilibrium.
Proof. As we proved in the proof of Lemma 5, K , K and K are non-empty, convex and
1 2 3
compact. Therefore, (i) of Lemma 1 is satisfied. Lemma 5 shows that A (i = 1,2,3) satisfies
i
(ii) of Lemma 1. It is easy to see that u (i = 1,2,3) is continuous and quasi-concave on
i
K . Hence, (iii) of Lemma 1 holds. Now we can appeal to Lemma 1 to have an equilibrium
i
(p∗,(x∗,α∗),y∗) for Γ.
5 Proof of the Auxiliary Theorem
We are now ready to provide the proof of the Auxiliary Theorem.
Proof of the Auxiliary Theorem. We will prove that for an equilibrium for Γ, there is a
competitive equilibrium for the economy.
Suppose that (p∗,(x∗,α∗),y∗) is an equilibrium for Γ. Hence there exist f∗ ∈ S1 such that
X
that x∗ = f∗(t)dµ with f∗(t) ∈ B(t,p∗) and g∗ ∈ S1 such that y∗ = g∗(t)dµ. We will show
T Y T
R R
that (p∗,f∗,g∗) is a competitive equilibrium for the economy.
(i) We show that g∗ is a profit maximization production plan.
By the definition of u , p∗ · y∗ = p∗ · g∗(t)dµ ≥ p∗ · y for any y ∈ Y (t)dµ. Therefore,
3 T T
R R
p∗· g∗(t)dµ = max p∗· Y (t)dµ. By Proposition 6 in [16] (p.63), we have max p∗· Y (t)dµ =
T T T
R R R
max p∗ · Y (t)dµ. Thus p∗ · g∗(t) = max p∗ · Y (t) for almost all t ∈ T. Note that Proposition
T
R
6 in [16] works in our commodity space E.
(ii) Let us prove p∗ · f∗(t) ≤ p∗ · e(t) + p∗ · g∗(t) a.e. t ∈ T.
Note that f∗(t) ∈ B(t,p∗) = {x ∈ X(t) : p∗ · x ≤ p∗ · e(t) + max p∗ · Y (t)} for almost all
t ∈ T. From p∗ · g∗(t) = max p∗ · Y (t) for a.e. t ∈ T, we have the desired result.
(iii) We show that U (x,p∗) > U (f∗(t),p∗) implies p∗ · x > p∗ · e(t) + p∗ · g∗(t) for almost all
t t
t ∈ T.
By way of contradiction, suppose there exists a non-empty subset S ∈ T which is of positive
measure and let F be a correspondence from S to X(t) defined by F(t) = {x ∈ X(t) : U (x,p∗) >
t
U (f(t),p∗) and p∗ · x ≤ p∗ · e(t) + p∗ · g∗(t)} for all t ∈ S. Recall that U (·,p∗) is measurable
t t
on the graph of X. Recall also that B(·,p∗) and X have measurable graphs. Therefore, F
has a measurable graph. Moreover, since X is integrably bounded, so is F. Hence, there is
a Bochner integrable selection f′ of F. We now define f′′ = f′χ + f∗χ . It is clear that
S T\S
12

U (f′′(t),p∗)dµ = U (f′(t),p∗)dµ + U (f∗(t),p∗)dµ > U (f∗(t),p∗)dµ = α∗ which is
t t t t
T S T\S T
R R R R
a contradiction.
(iv) We prove that (f∗,g∗) is a feasible allocation and a production plan.
We know that p∗ · f∗(t) ≤ p∗ · e(t) + p∗ · g∗(t) a.e. t ∈ T. By aggregating over T, we have
p∗ · ( f∗(t)dµ − e(t)dµ − g∗(t)dµ) ≤ 0. From the definition of the equilibrium of Γ, it
T T T
R R R
follows that for any p ∈ ∆,
∗ ∗ ∗ ∗ ∗
p·( f (t)dµ− e(t)dµ− g (t))dµ ≤ p ·( f (t)dµ− e(t)dµ− g (t)dµ) ≤ 0. (5.1)
Z Z Z Z Z Z
T T T T T T
Therefore, −( f∗(t)dµ− e(t)dµ− g∗(t)dµ) ∈ E which leads to f∗(t)dµ ≤ e(t)dµ+
T T T + T T
R R R R R
g∗(t)dµ.
T
R
6 Proof of the Main Theorem
We provide the proof of the Main Theorem. The proof follows Noguchi [31] by considering a net
of truncated subeconomies, whose consumption and production sets are norm compact, which
is in line with Toussaint [38] and Khan and Yannleis [27]. From the Auxiliary Theorem, we
have a net of competitive equilibria for the subeconomies. We then construct a sequence of
competitive equilibria. Finally, by invoking the exact Fatou’s lemma for infinite dimensional
separable Banach spaces, we obtain a competitive equilibrium for the original economy.
Proof of the Main Theorem. As in Noguchi [31], we construct the norm compact subsets
E X Y X m Y
of X(t) and Y (t). Let F = {K : T → 2 |K = co(K ∪ K ) where K = co(∪ ϕ ),K =
i=1 i
l
co(∪ ψ ) such that ϕ : T → E and ψ : T → E are measurable with ϕ (t) ∈ X(t) and ψ (t) ∈
j=1 j i j i j
X Y
Y (t) for all t ∈ T;e(t),η(t) ∈ K (t) and 0 ∈ K (t) for all t ∈ T}.
X Y X Y
Consider K = co(K ∪ K ) such that K (t) = co(e(t) ∪ η(t)) for all t ∈ T and K (t) =
0 for all t ∈ T. Then K ∈ F and thus F is non-empty. Let K ,K ∈ F. Then it is clear that
1 2
co(K ∪ K ) ∈ F, which implies that F is directed under the inclusion. Notice that for every
1 2
X m Y l
t ∈ T, K (t) = co(∪ ϕ (t)) and K (t) = co(∪ ψ (t)) are norm compact and thus K(t) is
i=1 i j=1 j
X Y
also norm compact (see Jameson [18] p.208). Now it follows that for K ∈ F, K and K are
X
non-empty, convex and norm compact valued, respectively. By Theorem III. 30 in [7], K and
Y
K are graph measurable.
K X Y K K
We define a truncated economy E = [(T,T ,µ),(K (t),K (t),U ,e(t)) ] where U is
t t∈T t
X X
the utility function U whose first domain is restricted to K (t). Since K (t) is convex and
t
norm closed, by the separation theorem it is weakly closed. Thus it belongs to the Borel σ-
K
algebra generated by the weak topology of E. It is clear that U is measurable.
K
It is easy to see that E satisfies all the assumptions of the Auxiliary Theorem. Therefore,
K
we appeal to the Auxiliary Theorem to obtain a competitive equilibrium (p ,f ,g ) for E .
K K K
13

X
Notice that {(p ,f ,g ) : K ∈ F} is a net directed by inclusion. For all K ∈ F, K (t) ⊂ X(t)
K K K
and, by A.1, X is integrably bounded and weakly compact valued. Thus {f } is well-dominated.
K
Y
We apply the same logic to K and Y to see {g } is also well-dominated.
K
Since X and Y are non-empty closed valued correspondences by A.1 and A.2, (T,T ,µ) a
complete probability space, E a complete separable metric space, by Theorem III. 30 in [7] there
are two sequences of measurable functions ϕ : T → E and ψ : T → E such that
i i
cl{ϕ (t)} = X(t) and cl{ψ (t)} = Y (t) for all t ∈ T. (6.1)
i i∈N j j∈N
X m Y l
We then construct K (t) using {ϕ (t)} and K (t) using {ψ (t)} . Let us define n =
m i i=1 l j j=1
min {m,l} where m,l are the numbers of ϕ and of ψ in K, respectively. Then consider a
i j
n X Y
sequence of truncated subeconomies {E } consisting of K (t) and K (t) for all t ∈ T. By the
n n
n
Auxiliary Theorem, we now have a sequence of competitive equilibria (p ,f ,g ) for E .
n n n
We appeal to Lemma 4 to have f ∈ L1(µ,E) and g ∈ L1(µ,E) such that f(t) ∈ X(t), f(t) ∈
w-Ls {f (t)} a.e t ∈ T and fdµ ∈ w-Ls { f dµ} as well as g(t) ∈ Y (t), g(t) ∈ w-Ls {g (t)}
n n n
T T
R R
a.e. t ∈ T and gdµ ∈ w-Ls { g dµ}. Therefore, f is an allocation and g is a production
n
T T
R R
plan. Since p belongs to ∆ which is weak* compact, it has a subsequence still denoted by p
n n
weak* converging to p.
We will now show that (p,f,g) is a competitive equilibrium for E.
Step 1: Let us show that for x ∈ X(t),
U (x,p) > U (f(t),p) implies p · x > p · e(t) + max p · Y (t) for almost all t ∈ T. (6.2)
t t
We follow Khan and Sagara [24] for this proof. By method of contradiction, suppose that
there exists S ∈ T of positive measure with the following property: for every t ∈ S there
exists xˆ ∈ X(t) such that U (xˆ,p) > U (f(t),p) and p · xˆ ≤ p · e(t) + max p · Y (t). Since
t t
p · e(t) + max p · Y (t) > 0 by A.3 and A.8, it follows from the joint continuity of U that
t
U (εxˆ,p) > U (f(t),p) and p · εxˆ < p · e(t) + max p · Y (t) for some ε ∈ (0,1). Thus, we
t t
can assume without loss of generality that for every t ∈ S there exists xˆ ∈ X(t) such that
U (xˆ,p) > U (f(t),p) and p · xˆ < p · e(t) + max p · Y (t). Let us define the correspondence
t t
E
Λ : S → 2 by
Λ(t) = {x ∈ X(t)|U (x,p) > U (f(t),p),p · x < p · e(t) + max p · Y (t)}.
t t
Λ is an integrably bounded correspondence and xˆ ∈ Λ(t). We now show that Λ is graph
measurable. Let Λ (t) := {x ∈ X(t)|U (x,p) > U (f(t),p)} and Λ (t) := {x ∈ E|p · x <
1 t t 2
p · e(t) + max p · Y (t)}. Then Λ(t) = Λ (t) ∩ Λ (t). We need to prove that Λ and Λ are graph
1 2 1 2
measurable. In the proof of Lemma 5, we already showed the joint measurability of the function
given by (t,x) → p · x − p · e(t) − max p · Y (t). Therefore, Λ is graph measurable.
2
14

We turn to Λ . Let ζ : T × E → T × E × E be a mapping defined by ζ(t,x) = (t,x,f(t))
1
and proj be a projection of (T × E) × (T × E × E) onto the range space T × E × E of
T×E×E
ζ. By the projection theorem,8 proj (G ) belongs to T ⊗ B(E,w) ⊗ B(E,w). We define a
T×E×E ζ
set H by
′ ′
H := {(t,x,x ) ∈ T × E × E|U (x,p) > U (x ,p)} ∩ ((G ) × E) ∩ proj (G ).
t t X T×E×E ζ
Then in view of A.5 and A.6, H belongs to T ⊗B(E,w)⊗B(E,w). Let proj be the projection
T×E
of (T ×E)×E onto T ×E. Since G = proj (H), we again appeal to the projection theorem
Λ1 T×E
to argue that G belongs to T ⊗ B(E,w).
Λ1
Therefore, Λ has a measurable selection by Aumann’s measurable selection theorem in [4].
Let h : S → E be a measurable selection from Λ. By Theorem III. 30 in [7], we can choose a
sequence of measurable selections h : S → E such that h (t) ∈ X(t) converges to h(t) in norm
n n
ˆ
for all t ∈ S. By Lemma 4, there exists a Bochner integrable function h : S → E such that
ˆ ˆ
h(t) ∈ w-Ls{h (t)} and h(t) ∈ X(t) a.e. t ∈ S. Hence, there is a subsequence of {h (t)} in E
n n
ˆ ˆ
converging weakly to h(t) for a.e. t ∈ S. It is clear that h(t) = h(t) a.e. t ∈ S and we also have
(f(t),h(t)) ∈ w-Ls{(f (t),h (t))} a.e. t ∈ S.
n n
Suppose now that the following set defined by
n n Y
{t ∈ S|U (h (t),p ) > U (f (t),p ),p · h (t) < p · e(t) + max p · K (t)}
t n n t n n n n n n n
[
n∈N
n n
is of measure zero. Then for each n, U (f (t),p ) ≥ U (h (t),p ) or p · h (t) ≥ p · e(t) +
t n n t n n n n n
Y
max p · K (t) a.e. t ∈ S. Notice for any y ∈ Y (t), there is a sequence of measurable functions
n n
Y
y : T → E such that y (t) ∈ K (t) converges to y in norm for all t ∈ T by Theorem III. 30 in [7].
n n n
When p converges to p in the weak* topology, we have p ·h (t) → p·h(t) and p ·y (t) → p·y.
n n n n n
Passing to the limit yields U (f(t),p) ≥ U (h(t),p) or p·h(t) ≥ p·e(t)+max p·Y (t) a.e. t ∈ S.9
t t
But this is a contradiction to the fact that h is a measurable selection from Λ. Hence, there
n n Y
exists n such that {t ∈ S|U (h (t),p ) > U (f (t),p),p · h (t) < p · e(t) + max p · K (t)}
t n n t n n n n n n
is of positive measure. However, this contradicts the fact that p and f are a price and an
n n
n
allocation of a Walrasian equilibrium for E . We proved (6.2).
Indeed, we can further show that
p · f(t) ≥ p · e(t) + max p · Y (t) (6.3)
for almost all t ∈ T.
By A.4 (ii), if f(t) is a satiation point, (6.3) follows. If f(t) is not a satiation point, f(t)
belongs to the weak closure of the upper contour set {x′ ∈ X(t) : U (x′,p) > U (f(t),p)} for any
t t
8
see Theorem III.23 in [7].
9 Note that for x ∈ K nX (t), U tn (x,p) = U t(x,p) for any p ∈ ∆.
15

p ∈ ∆. Thus, (6.2) implies (6.3).
Step 2: We show that f is a feasible allocation and g is a feasible production plan.
n
Since (p ,f ,g ) is a competitive equilibrium for E , it is clear that f (t)dµ ≤ e(t)dµ+
n n n n
T T
R R
g (t)dµ. Recall that for {f } and {g } Lemma 4 holds. Thus we can extract subsequences
n n n
T
R
(which we do not relabel) from {f } and {g } such that f (t)dµ → f(t)dµ weakly and
n n n
T T
R R
g (t)dµ → g(t)dµ weakly. Now from f (t)dµ ≤ e(t)dµ + g (t)dµ we obtain
n n n
T T T T T
R R R R R
f(t)dµ ≤ e(t)dµ + g(t)dµ. (6.4)
Z Z Z
T T T
Step 3: We prove that p · f(t) ≤ p · e(t) + p · g(t) for almost all t ∈ T.
From (6.3), we have
p · f(t) ≥ p · e(t) + p · g(t) (6.5)
for almost all t ∈ T. By integrating (6.5) over T,
[p · f(t) − p · e(t) − p · g(t)]dµ = p · [f(t) − e(t) − g(t)]dµ ≥ 0. (6.6)
Z Z
T T
But from (6.4) it follows that
p · [f(t) − e(t) − g(t)]dµ = [p · f(t) − p · e(t) − p · g(t)] ≤ 0. (6.7)
Z Z
T T
Hence, we can conclude [p · f(t) − p · e(t) − p · g(t)] = 0. Therefore, we have
T
R
p · f(t) = p · e(t) + p · g(t) (6.8)
for almost all t ∈ T.
Step 4: Let us prove p · g(t) = max p · Y (t) a.e. t ∈ T.
From (6.3) and (6.8), we have the following inequality:
max p · Y (t) ≤ p · f(t) − p · e(t) = p · g(t) (6.9)
for almost all t ∈ T. Obviously, we have max p·Y (t) ≥ p·g(t). Hence, the conclusion follows.
7 Concluding Remarks
Remark 1 We can appeal to Galerkin approximations, as suggested by Khan and Sagara [24],
n
to construct a sequence of truncated subeconomies {E } with finite dimensional commodity
16

n
spaces. Each E can have a competitive equilibrium (p ,f ,g ) due to Greenberg et al. [12].
n n n
We then apply the exact Fatou’s lemma to the sequence of {f ,g } to obtain f and g. By
n n
the weak* compactness of ∆, we can extract a subsequence from {p } that weak* converges
n
to p ∈ ∆. Applying similar arguments as in Khan and Sagara [24], we can show that (p,f,g)
satisfies the properties of a competitive equilibrium.10
Remark 2 The Auxiliary theorem can be seen as a direct proof of Greenberg et al. [12] for
infinite dimensional commodity spaces without taking the approximation approach.
Remark 3 We can replace the weak compactness of production sets by the following condition:
Let A be a set defined by A = {g′ ∈ S1 : ∃f′ ∈ S1 s.t. f′(t)dµ ≤ e(t)dµ + g′(t)dµ}.
Y Y Y X T T T
R R R
We assume A is weakly compact.
Y
Applying our approach in the proof of the main theorem, we construct a sequence of truncated
subeconomies {En } and obtain a sequence of competitive equilibria {p ,f ,g }.11 Since X(t) is
n n n
integrably bounded and weakly compact, we apply the exact Fatou’s lemma to {f } to have f
n
and since A is weakly compact, we have g → g in the weak topology. Also p → p ∈ ∆ in the
Y n n
weak* topology. We are then able to prove that (p,f,g) is a competitive equilibrium.
For the sequence {f }, we need two results: (by passing to a subsequence) f → f and
n n
f (t) → f(t) for almost all t ∈ T. These results make f a feasible allocation and f(t) a maximal
n
element for the agent t. To our best knowledge, there are two ways to obtain these results:
invoking the exact Fatou’s Lemma or appealing to Theorem 5.1 in Khan and Yannelis [27].
Both approaches require weak compact subsets of the consumption sets. Therefore, even when
we relax the weak compactness assumption of the consumption sets, we still need some weak
compact subsets of the consumption sets which contain the set of maximal elements.
10
We are grateful to an anonymous referee for drawing our attention to Khan and Sagara [24].
11
Remark 3 in [12] provided an equilibrium existence result with non-compact consumption and production
sets for their economy.
17

References
[1] Aliprantis, C. and K. Border (2006), Infinite Dimensional Analysis, 3rd edition, New York,
Springer-Verlag.
[2] Aubin, J.-P. and H. Frankowska (1990), Set-Valued Analysis, Boston, Birkh¨auser.
[3] Aumann, R.J. (1966), “Existence of competitive equilibria in markets with a continuum of
traders,” Econometrica 34, pp. 1-17.
[4] Aumann, R.J. (1969), “Measurable utility and the measurable choice theorem,” in: La
D´ecision, CNRS, Aix-en-Provence, pp. 15-26.
[5] Balasko, Y. (2003), “Economies with price-dependent preferences,” Journal of Economic
Theory 109, pp. 333359
[6] Balasko, Y. (2003), “Temporary financial equilibrium,” Economic Theory 21, pp. 118.
[7] Castaing, C. and M. Valadier (1977), Convex Analysis and Measurable Multifunctions, Lec-
ture Notes in Math. 580, Springer, Berlin.
[8] Debreu, G. (1952), “A social equilibrium existence theorem,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 38, pp. 886-893.
[9] Diestel, J. and J.J. Uhl (1977), Vector Measures, Mathematical Surveys No. 15. Providence,
American Mathematical Society.
[10] Fajardo, S. and H.J. Keisler (2002), Model Theory of Stochastic Processes, A K Peters,
Ltd., Natick.
[11] Fremlin, D. H. (2012), Measure Theory, Vol. 3: Measure Algebras, Part I, second ed., Torres
Fremlin, Colchester.
[12] Greenberg, J., B. Shitovitz and A. Wieczorek (1979), “Existence of equilibria in atom-
less production economies with price dependent preferences,” Journal of Mathematical Eco-
nomics 6, pp. 31-41.
[13] Greinecker, M and K. Podczeck (2013), “Liapounoffs vector measure theorem in Banach
spaces and applications to general equilibrium theory,” Economic Theory Bulletin 1, pp.
157-173.
[14] Greinecker, M and K. Podczeck (2017), “An Exact Fatou’s Lemma for Gelfand Integrals
by Means of Young Measure Theory,” Journal of Convex Analysis 24, pp. 621-644.
[15] Hildenbrand, W. (1970), “Existence of equilibria for economies with production and a
measure space of consumers,” Econometrica 38, pp. 608-623.
18

[16] Hildenbrand, W. (1974), Core and Equilibria of a large economy, Princeton University
Press, Princeton.
[17] Hoover, D.N. and H.J. Keisler (1984), “Adapted probability distributions,” Transactions
of the American Mathematical Society 286, pp. 159-201.
[18] Jameson, G. (1974), Topology and Normed Spaces, Chapman and Hall, London.
[19] Kakutani, S. (1944), “Construction of a Non-separable Extension of the Lebesgue Measure
Space,” Proceedings of the Imperial Academy 20 (3), pp. 115-119.
[20] Keisler, H.J. and Y. Sun (2009), “Why saturated probability spaces are necessary,” Ad-
vances in Mathematics 221, pp. 15841607.
[21] Khan, M.A. and N. Sagara (2013), “Maharam-types and Lyapunov’s theorem for vector
measures on Banach spaces,” Illinois Journal of Mathematics 57, pp. 145-169.
[22] Khan, M.A. and N. Sagara (2014), “Weak sequential convergence in L1(µ,X) and an exact
version of Fatou’s lemma,” Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications 412, pp.
554-563.
[23] Khan, M.A. and N. Sagara (2016), “Relaxed large economies with infinite-dimensional com-
modity spaces: The existence of Walrasian equilibria,” Journal of Mathematical Economics
67, pp. 95-107.
[24] Khan, M.A. and N. Sagara (2017), “Fatou’s lemma, Galerkin approximations and the exis-
tence of Walrasian equilibria in infinite dimensions,” Pure and Applied Functional Analysis
2 (2), pp. 317-355.
[25] Khan, M.A., N. Sagara and T. Suzuki (2016), “An exact Fatou lemma for Gelfand integrals:
a characterization of the Fatou property,”Positivity 20, pp. 343354.
[26] Khan, M.A. and T. Suzuki (2016), “On differentiated and indivisible commodities: An
expository re-framing of Mas-Colell’s 1975 model,” Advances in Mathematical Economics
20, pp. 103-128.
[27] Khan, M.A. and N.C. Yannelis (1991), “Equilibria in markets with a continuum of agents
and commodities,” in: Khan, M.A. and N.C. Yannelis, eds., Equilibrium Theory in Infinite
Dimensional Spaces, New York, Springer-Verlag, pp. 233-248.
[28] Lee, S. (2013), “Competitive equilibrium with an atomless measure space of agents and in-
finite dimensional commodity space without convex and complete preferences,” Hitotsubashi
Journal of Economics 54, pp. 221-230.
19

[29] Liu, J. (2017), “Existence of competitive equilibrium in coalition production economies with
a continuum of agents,” International Journal of Game Theory 46, pp. 941-955.
[30] Maharam, D., (1942), “On homogeneous measure algebra,” Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the USA, 28, pp. 108-111.
[31] Noguchi, M. (1997), “Economies with a continuum of consumers, a continuum of suppliers
and an infinite dimensional commodity space,” Journal of Mathematical Economics 27, pp.
121.
[32] Podczeck, K. (1997), “Markets with infinitely many commodities and a continuum of agents
with non-convex preferences,” Economic Theory 9, pp. 385-426.
[33] Podczeck, K. (2008), “On the convexity and compactness of the integral of a Banach space
valued correspondence,” Journal of Mathematical Economics 44, pp. 836-852.
[34] Schaefer, H. H. and M. P. Wolff, (1999), Topological Vector Spaces, 2nd edn., Springer,
Berlin.
[35] Schmeidler, D. (1969), “Competitive equilibria in markets with a continuum of traders and
incomplete preferences,” Econometrica 37, pp. 578-585.
[36] Shafer, W. J. (1974), “The Nontransitive Consumer,” Econometrica 42, pp. 913-919.
[37] Sun, Y. and N.C. Yannelis (2008), “Saturation and the integration of Banach valued cor-
respondences,” Journal of Mathematical Economics 44, pp. 861-865.
[38] Toussaint, S. (1984), “On the Existence of Equilibria in Economies with Infinitely Many
Commodities and Ordered Preferences,” Journal of Economic Theory 33, pp. 98-115.
[39] Yannelis, N.C. (1991), “Set-valued functions of two variables,” in: Khan, M.A. and N.C.
Yannelis, eds., Equilibrium Theory in Infinite Dimensional Spaces, New York, Springer-
Verlag, pp. 36-72.
20