“Historical signs in the landscape”: Ecosystem 
1 
services, motivation and challenges of pollarding 
2 
in Western Norway 
3 
4  Anna Birgitte Milford, Division of Food Production and Society, Norwegian Institute of Bioeconomy 
5  Research, Bergen, Norway 
6  Email: anna.birgitte.milford@nibio.no 
7  Jørund Johansen, Division of Food Production and Society, Norwegian Institute of Bioeconomy 
8  Research, Bergen, Norway 
9  Signe Kårstad, Division of Survey and Statistics, Norwegian Institute of Bioeconomy Research, Bergen, 
10  Norway 
11  Fride Høisted Schein, Division of Forest and Forest Resources, Norwegian Institute of Bioeconomy 
12  Research, Bergen, Norway 
13   
14  Acknowledgements: 
15  We would like to thank Jana Doudová, Péter Szabó, Lukas Cizek and Ingvild Austad for useful 
16  comments. 
17  This study was supported by project "Application of traditional knowledge to halt biodiversity loss in 
18  woodlands" (TO01000132) financed by the Technology Agency of the Czech Republic and Norway 
19  Grants 2014-2021. 
20   
Abstract 
21 
22  Pollarding in agroforestry systems was traditionally an important practice for fodder acquisition in 
23  Western Norway, as well as in many other parts of the world. The practice has long been in decline, 
24  but to maintain cultural landscapes and biodiversity enhancement from pollarding, farmers now 
25  receive a public grant for each tree they pollard. In this interdisciplinary study we investigate which 
26  ecosystem services modern pollarding practices provide, under the influence of the current pollarding 
27  policy. We have performed both in-depth interviews and a quantitative survey targeting all pollarding 
28  farmers in the county of Vestland in Western Norway. We find that bioresources obtained from the 
29  branches from pollarding are to some extent still taken into use, mainly in the form of tree fodder for 
30  farm animals and firewood, but a lot of the branches remain unused. Biodiversity benefits are obtained 
31  from preserving old trees that often are located on agricultural land as solitary trees, as these trees 
32  provide important habitats, particularly for species growing on the bark, such as lichens and mosses, or 
33  within the decaying wood, such as, for example, fungi and insects. The modern practice of letting 
34  branches rot in the field provide habitats for insects and hence additional benefits to biodiversity. For 
35  the farmers, the main motivations to pollard are the cultural, aesthetic and historical values of 
36  pollarded trees. They see few disadvantages with pollarding, and most of them plan to continue in the 
37  future. The grant provides an incentive for pollarding, but our results indicate that the practice would 
38  continue without it, although less than now, especially with the establishment of new pollards.  
1 
 

| “Historical signs in the landscape”: Ecosystem    |
|:--------------------------------------------------|
| services, motivation and challenges of pollarding |
| in Western Norway                                 |

39  Keywords: Agroforestry; Cultural landscapes; Agricultural Policy; Livestock farming; Biodiversity; 
40  traditional knowledge 
1. Introduction 
41 
42  Low-intensity farming systems such as agroforestry have been advocated as environmentally 
43  sustainable food systems that can contribute both to biodiversity enhancement and food security 
44  (Barthel et al. 2013). Previous studies have also established that agricultural landscapes containing 
45  trees have important cultural and aesthetic values (Rolo et al. 2021; van Zanten et al. 2013). One 
46  agricultural practice that has been used throughout history in many parts of the world, and in some 
47  places still today, is pollarding, a pruning system involving the removal of the upper branches of a 
48  tree, typically at a level where grazing animals cannot reach them, which stimulates secondary buds to 
49  grow as new branches over and over again (Turner et al. 2009). The potential economic, ecological 
50  and cultural benefits from agroforestry make it relevant to increase our knowledge about present-day 
51  management of agricultural systems including trees that are being pollarded, in this case in a region 
52  where pollarding traditionally was done mainly to provide fodder for livestock. This empirical study of 
53  Western Norway seeks to fill in these knowledge gaps using pollarding farmers in the region as 
54  informants. 
55  Ever since the first people started keeping livestock in the Nordic countries more than 4000 years ago, 
56  it has been a challenge to provide them with enough fodder, and for thousands of years it was common 
57  to cut tree branches and feed animals with leaves and bark (Austad et al. 2003b). Traditionally, 
58  pollarded trees in Norway were situated in both forests, grazing land and hay meadows (Høeg 1974). 
59  Trees were pollarded in the late summer or early autumn and the foliage, which has high nutritional 
60  values and contains minerals beneficial to animal health (Smith et al. 2020), was dried and used as 
61  fodder during the winter months. Pollarded branches were gathered in bundles (called “kjerv”) and 
62  dried in the outfields or inside outfield barns especially built for this purpose, where also hay was 
63  dried (Austad et al. 2003a). Branches and bark were used for agricultural tools and material for 
64  handcrafts (Hauge et al. 2014).  It was a self-sustained, diversified agricultural system that provided 
65  resilience for instance in the event of failing grass harvests caused by climatic events such as droughts, 
66  frost or high precipitation (Visted and Stigum 1971). A recent study has found that when pollarding is 
67  done in an agroforestry system with hay meadows, where fodder harvesting is done both from the 
68  ground as grass and from the trees as foliage, it is possible to maintain the same level of fodder 
69  production as from an intensified production system reliant on industrial fertilisers (Rydgren et al. 
70  2021). Furthermore, as the presence of trees in hay meadows increases carbon storage (Mosquera-
71  Losada et al. 2018), such an agroforestry system can play an important role in climate change 
72  adaptation and mitigation (Rydgren et al. 2021). 
73  Pollarded trees are examples of so-called culturally modified trees, which contribute to the formation 
74  of cultural landscapes where they manifest long-term management and land occupancy (Davidson-
75  Hunt 2003; Turner et al. 2009). Being the result of human activities, pollarded trees can become 
76  incorporated into the culture and identity of the people who established and maintained them (Turner 
77  et al. 2009). Furthermore, particularly old pollards can acquire aesthetic values linked to personal 
78  sentiments and a “sense of place” (Blicharska and Mikusiński 2014; Garner 2004). As such, pollarded 
79  trees can produce cultural and social values that are important for the communities where they are 
80  located. 
81  Pollarding reduces crown size, which prevents damages by wind and snow accumulation, and thereby 
82  uprooting and windbreak, increasing their chance to reach an old age. The size and age of these trees 
83  impacts their ability to host other species. Larger trees have more bark area available for epiphytic 
84  colonisation, and the longer the habitat has been available, the larger is the expected number of 
85  colonisations (Schei et al. 2013; Snäll et al. 2003). Furthermore, as trees age, the chemical and 
86  structural properties of their bark change (e.g. pH, crevice depth, thickness and roughness), increasing 
2 
 

87  habitat heterogeneity and hence epiphytic species richness (Gustafsson and Eriksson 1995; Ranius et 
88  al. 2008). Old trees also tend to get hollowed, but in pollards this process happens at a younger tree 
89  age (Sebek et al. 2013). Hollow trees are key structural elements for a wide range of organisms 
90  including birds (Żmihorski et al. 2009), mammals (Ruczyński and Bogdanowicz 2008) and many 
91  saproxylic insects (Castro et al. 2013; Dubois et al. 2009; Sebek et al. 2013), and in Norway, as in the 
92  rest of Europe, the number of such trees is declining (Cálix et al. 2018). Many epiphytic and hollow 
93  specialists prefer open, sun exposed conditions, which mainly occur in managed woody pastures in the 
94  cultural landscape (e.g. Castro et al. 2013; Ranius 2002; Żmihorski et al. 2009).  
95  More generally, scattered trees, as pollards in many cases are in the cultural landscape, provide a 
96  disproportionate number of ecosystem benefits given their size and the area they occupy. In addition to 
97  providing rare habitats, these benefits include increasing soil nutrients, structural complexity and 
98  habitat connectivity (Manning et al. 2006) as well as abundance and richness of arthropods and 
99  vertebrates (Prevedello et al. 2018) They may also facilitate ecosystem services such as pollination, by 
100  providing nesting opportunities for cavity-nesting bees (Klein et al. 2006; Sydenham et al. 2016)  
101  In Western Norway, pollarding was common until the beginning of the 20th century, when new 
102  methods for fodder harvesting were introduced. During the Second World War, pollarding was taken 
103  up again, but after that, the practice gradually went down (Hauge et al. 2014). This can be seen in 
104  relation to a general tendency in Europe, where cultural landscapes provided by for instance 
105  agroforestry are in decline due to the low economic returns of these low-intensity, diversified forms of 
106  agriculture (Barthel et al. 2013; Billen et al. 2021). These traditional farming systems are either 
107  replaced with more intense, monocultural forms of agriculture; or, in the case of more marginalised 
108  areas, cultural landscapes are either reforested or abandoned (Dittrich et al. 2017). Scattered trees on 
109  agricultural land are in particular decline because they take up space, reduce crop yield and make the 
110  use of machines more difficult (Blanco et al. 2019; Fleming et al. 2019).  
111  Cultural landscapes are manmade and will disappear unless they are managed and maintained 
112  continuously (Schleyer and Plieninger 2011). Pollarded trees are particularly vulnerable to lack of 
113  maintenance, since this will cause the crown to become oversized compared to the tree’s structure and 
114  root system, making it top heavy and more susceptible to uprooting (Read 2000). 
115  Without some form of policy intervention there is a high risk of losing the ecological and social 
116  benefits from maintaining cultural landscapes (Simelton et al. 2021). On the other side, top-down 
117  policy encouraging specialized intensive farming, sustained yield forestry, and conservation efforts 
118  concentrated on the preservation of closed canopy forests compromise the future of traditional agro-
119  silvo-pastoral systems (Bobiec et al. 2019). 
120  To make agriculture more sustainable, policy makers must motivate farmers to apply more diverse 
121  land use practices which support biodiversity values, such as having solitary trees in agricultural 
122  landscapes (Sandberg and Jakobsson 2018). Previous studies find that although subsidies are 
123  important, there are also other factors which motivate farmers to maintain trees in cultural landscapes. 
124  These include aesthetic values (Fleming et al. 2019; Sandberg and Jakobsson 2018) sheltering 
125  functions for livestock (Blanco et al. 2019; Fleming et al. 2019; Sandberg and Jakobsson 2018), 
126  erosion control (Guimarães et al. 2023) and obtaining firewood from pruned or pollarded trees (Blanco 
127  et al. 2019). To our knowledge, no studies of farmers’ motivation for maintaining trees in cultural 
128  landscapes have been carried out in Western Norway in the last decades. 
129  In the county of Vestland in Norway, the county governor started a regional programme for subsidising 
130  pollarding in 20051. Pollarding was seen as strategically important in the region because it was related 
131  to cultural landscapes, historical values and enhancement of biodiversity (County Governor Vestland 
 
1 Before that, some of the municipalities had chosen to use grants earmarked for environmental purposes, for 
pollarding grants. 
3 
 

132  2019). When the pollarding grant programme started in 2005, farmers in the region Sogn og Fjordane 
133  could also receive grants for pollarding new trees, but as this resulted in large amounts of grant 
134  applications the policy was changed. It was decided that only already established pollarded trees were 
135  eligible for the grant, but if an old, pollarded tree died, it could be replaced with a new one belonging 
136  to the same group of trees. Another change in the programme was made in 2019: farmers could only 
137  apply for grant for the same tree every 5 years instead of every year, and they could only apply for 70 
138  trees per year (before there was no limit to the number of trees). One of the reasons for this change 
139  was to make it easier for the County Governor to control if the trees had actually been pollarded (each 
140  year 5% of the pollarding farmers receive a control inspection). As a compensation to changes in the 
141  grant regime, the grant per tree was increased in 2019, it is now 500 NOK (43 Euro). A similar 
142  pollarding grant is also provided for farmers in four of the other fifteen regions in Norway (Rogaland, 
143  Viken, Vestfold og Telemark and Agder). In relation to the programme, farmers are informed about 
144  methods for pollarding via internet, including instructions that the branches and leaves should be 
145  cleared from the area to make it appear “neat and tidy”2.  
146  Using qualitative and quantitative methods to extract information from pollarding farmers in the 
147  Vestland county, the aim of this study is, firstly, to gain knowledge on modern pollarding, including on 
148  pollarding procedures and ecosystem services provided in terms of bioresources, social and cultural 
149  benefits and biodiversity conservation, as well as identifying the challenges connected with pollarding 
150  today. The second aim is to gain a better understanding of the role of agricultural policies in support 
151  for pollarding activities, and how it influences farmers’ motivation for pollarding compared with other 
152  motivating factors. A deeper understanding of these aspects will better enable us to foresee the 
153  development of pollarding in Western Norway into the future and identify possibilities for obtaining 
154  more desirable outcomes, for instance with the help of policy measures such as grants. 
2. Methods 
155 
156  The study site, Vestland county in Norway, is located within the area of the northern broadleaved 
157  deciduous woods in Europe, in a climatic transitional zone between the nemoral deciduous forests of 
158  southern Scandinavia and the widespread boreal coniferous forests to the north (Moen 1999). 
159  Broadleaved deciduous woodlands in this region have high species richness and several thermophilous 
160  species. In Vestland, 27% of the land is covered by forest, while 69% is open firm ground, bare rocks, 
161  inland waters, glaciers and bogs (Statistics Norway 2023b). The region is characterised by steep 
162  mountains and long fjords, and due to this topography, as well as soil and climatic conditions, only 3% 
163  of the land is used for agriculture, of which 98% is meadows (Statistics Norway 2023a). The total 
164  cultivated area went down by 5% between 2010 and 2020 (Knutsen et al. 2022), being mainly 
165  abandoned or afforested primarily with spruce (Cusens et al. 2024). The fjord areas of the region have 
166  an important and prosperous fruit production and are known for the beauty of the landscape which 
167  attracts tourists in the summer season. 
168  The study was performed with qualitative (semi-structured interviews) and quantitative (survey) 
169  methods. Data collection and storage methods were compliant with ethical and legal privacy 
170  regulations as described by the Norwegian Agency for Shared Services in Education and Research 
171  (Sikt). To gain insight to the theme of the study, interviews were performed with a representative for 
172  the County Governor of Vestland, who is responsible for distributing the grant earmarked pollarding in 
173  the region, as well as a representative from the Norwegian Agricultural Agency working with grants 
174  related to agricultural landscapes. In addition, an interview was also conducted with a representative 
175  for the Farmer’s Union in the region, who had special knowledge on pollarding. These three 
176  interviews were conducted in the period February to September 2022, and they were not recorded, but 
 
2 County Governor of Norway https://www.statsforvalteren.no/vestland/landbruk-og-mat/skjult-side---
landbruk/tilskot-til-skjotsel-av-styvingstre--styving-utfort-i-soknadsaret/ 
4 
 

177  notes were taken. The questions were centred around the grant and the conditions for receiving it, as 
178  well as general information about pollarding in the region.  
179  The information from these interviews, as well as information retrieved from literature, were used to 
180  create an interview guide. The interview guide consisted of questions related to how pollarding was 
181  done at the farm and the costs, benefits and motivation for pollarding. 
182  Using the register for farmers who received grants for pollarding in the period 2019-2021, we selected 
183  12 farmers for the in-depth interviews, with the aim to get a representative sample with respect to their 
184  number of pollarded trees, geographic location of farms, and age and gender of farmers. However, as 
185  farmers with more trees were more likely to say yes to the interview, more interviews were made with 
186  this category than with farmers with only a few pollarded trees. All the farmers were from the Vestland 
187  county, spread on the municipalities Voss, Kvam, Ulvik and Sogndal (Figure 1). 
188   
189  Figure 1: Map of Vestland county, Norway. Shades of green show the number of trees that received pollarding 
190  grant per municipality in 2022. Municipalities where interviews took place are marked with ✦.  
191  We used semi-structured interview techniques, with the same interview guide for all interviews, but 
192  with follow-up questions. The interviews were conducted in the period December 2022-March 2023. 
193  All interviews were done during farm visits, which included a tour to see the pollarded trees. All 
194  farmer interviews were recorded and transcribed. The interviews were analysed with the computer 
5 
 

195  software NVivo by two of the researchers who both coded all the interviews. Quotes from interviews 
196  are coded according to the four municipalities (A-D) and number of interviewees in each municipality. 
197  The qualitative data were used to develop a questionnaire for an online survey. The survey contained 
198  questions that can be roughly divided into five groups: 1) descriptions of the pollarded trees, their 
199  location and what was done with the branches from the trees, 2) motivation for pollarding 3) 
200  challenges with pollarding, 4) knowledge acquisition and needs, 5) demographic information about 
201  respondents. The survey question categories and scales were selected according to the purpose of each 
202  question, using standard wording translated into Norwegian (Nynorsk). 
203  The survey was sent out in October 2023 via email and phone message to all farmers who had 
204  received grants for pollarded trees in the Vestland county in the period 2019-2022. In the invitation to 
205  participate, the farmers were informed that four respondents would be randomly selected as the winner 
206  of a gift card from a national agricultural cooperative store.  
207  The total number of pollarding grant receivers (2019-2022) was 367, but contact information was only 
208  available for 336 of these. Of these, we received complete answers from 137 and incomplete answers 
209  from 12 farmers. The response rate was thus 41% for the complete answers, plus 4% incomplete 
210  answers. Comparing the number of pollarded trees of those who answered the survey with those who 
211  did not, we find that those who answered on average applied for grants for 9 trees in 2022 (median 4), 
212  while those who did not answer applied for grants for 14 trees (median 6). Hence, unlike what one 
213  could expect, farmers with more pollarded trees were not more eager to answer the survey than those 
214  with less trees. This indicates that the respondents are not skewed towards farmers with a particular 
215  interest in pollarding.  
216  The average age of the respondents was 53 years, and 70% had work outside the farm, which both is 
217  in line with the averages for farmers in Norway (Zahl-Thanem and Melås 2020). There were 12% 
218  women, which is slightly lower than for the total farmer population (16,4%) (Ibid). The average year 
219  for taking over the farm was 2001.  
220  The data were collected using the online survey tool SurveyXact, figures were made in R (R CoreTeam 
221  2023) using the tidyverse package (Wickham et al. 2019). 
3. Results 
222 
223  3.1.  Pollarding procedures  
224  Pollarded trees are located in several different types of landscapes (see Table 1), but the most common 
225  location is infield pasture, often in edge zones along fences, rivers, lake or fjord or on small infield 
226  islets/mounds that are unfit for harvesting and grazing (Figure 2:).  
6 
 

227   
228  Figure 2:  Pollarded landscape in pasture in Grinde, Sogndal (A) and Ulvik (B). C) Old hollowed pollard. D) Pile of pollarded 
229  branches in pasture area, Voss. 
230  Among the survey respondents, 31% have pollards in hay meadows, and among these only 2 farmers 
231  did not harvest grass regularly (once or several times per year). Some pollards have probably been 
232  removed from hay meadows to allow efficient machine grass harvest, as this farmer explains: 
233  “Everything (the pollards) is in the pasture, it would be impractical to have 
234  pollards in the hay meadows … My father removed some trees when he cultivated 
235  an area.” A1 
236  Table 1 Location of pollarded trees in landscape  
 Location  Percentage 
Infield pasture  80,4% 
Border zone (near border to cultivated field, road, along river/lake etc.)  48,6% 
Barnyard  39,9% 
Hay meadow  31,2% 
Rough grazing land  24,6% 
In forest (for instance along footpath)  20,3% 
Åkerholmar/field islands  5,1% 
7 
 

Other places  2,9% 
237   
238  The most common type of pollarded tree is ash, which 75% of the respondents have. Elm, willow, 
239  birch and rowan are also quite common, while only a few farmers have oak, hazel and linden trees 
240  (table 2). 
241  Table 2 Type of trees pollarded by farmers, with percentage of farmers having at least one of the species. 
 Common name  Latin name  Percentage 
Fraxinus excelsior 
Ash  74,8% 
Ulmus glabra 
Elm  42,9% 
Salix caprea 
Goat willow  39,5% 
Betula pubescens and B. pendula 
Birch  31,3% 
Sorbus aucuparia 
Rowan  20,4% 
Quercus petraea and Q. robur 
Oak  7,5% 
Corylus avellana 
Hazel  4,8% 
Tilia cordata 
Lime  4,1% 
 
Other  2,7% 
242   
243  One of the interviewed farmers explained that most of her newly established pollarded trees were 
244  birch, because she had animals grazing in the field where she wanted to establish them, and they 
245  would eat the ash trees, but leave the birch alone.  
246  They [the sheep] are not fond of birch leaves, they have to be quite hungry to eat 
247  that. (Interviewee D1) 
248  When interviewed farmers were asked about the ages of their trees it became clear that it was very 
249  difficult for them to tell, except for the ones that they themselves had established.  
250  It’s a guess. They are old at least, I’m sure about that. It wouldn’t surprise me if 
251  they are a hundred years, maybe. (Interviewee B1) 
252  During the farm visits the researchers observed that many of the pollards had been established in a 
253  period when pollarding was still a common practice for fodder acquisition and had reached a high age. 
254  The survey results show that pollarding takes place in all seasons, but the most common is autumn 
255  (52%) and winter (42%). Only 16% of the farmers pollard in the spring and 26% in the summer. 
256  Traditional pollarding was done in the summer or early autumn when leaves are most nutritious. In the 
257  interviews some farmers explained that they pollarded in the autumn because the livestock were 
258  returning from summer pasture in the mountains and could eat the foliage from the branches as they 
259  were lying on the ground. Others explained that they pollarded in autumn because they were reminded 
260  by the deadline for applying for the grant on October 1st. Those who pollarded in winter said it was to 
261  protect the tree, and because it was easier to do it without the leaves when the branches were used as 
262  firewood.  
263  Results from the survey show that 78% of the farmers do the pollarding themselves, and 18% share the 
264  work with someone else. Only 3% let someone else do the work. The qualitative interviews revealed 
265  that the most common tool for pollarding was chainsaw, and sometimes telescopic saw to reach higher. 
266  Most farmers explained that they also used a ladder when pollarding. 
267  When asked in interviews how much time it takes to pollard, answers varied substantially, from 10 
268  minutes to more than a day, depending on the size of the tree and its branches. There is a large 
8 
 

269  difference between restoring an old tree that has not been pollarded for many years and establishing a 
270  new tree as a pollard. Of those who answered the survey, 65% had restored trees that had not been 
271  pollarded for more than 20 years3, and 64% had established new pollards.  
272  There is a lot of variation in what farmers do with the branches after pollarding. The survey results 
273  show that a common practice was to let the branches rot in heaps in the field, and to use the largest 
274  branches as firewood (Figure 2).  
275   
276  Figure 2: Answer to question “What do you do with branches and leaves after pollarding?”. Rounded percentages for each 
277  category are shown when the category reached at least 4%. 
278  According to the survey results, 29% of the respondents sometimes make and dry bundles with 
279  pollarded branches (called “kjerv”) to use as animal fodder, but only 7% always do it, and 41% never 
280  do it. However, it is quite common for farmers to let the pollarded branches lay on the ground and let 
281  livestock eat leaves and bark, which 19% answered that they always do. The 104 who answered that 
282  they use pollarded branches and foliage as fodder give them mainly to sheep (87%). Some also give 
283  them to goats (14%), cows (13%) or horses (10%).  
284  Some of the farmers burn the branches, put them through a woodchipper, or drive them out of the area. 
285  Among those who sometimes use a woodchipper (57 of 147 respondents), the most common practice 
286  is to use it as bedding for farm animals in the barn (21 respondents) or to let it lay on the ground in the 
287  field (18 respondents), and there are also some (14 respondents) who compost it and use it as fertiliser. 
288  One of the interviewed farmers explained that before making the compost he would use the wood 
289  chips as bedding for the farm animals, and this had benefits both for the animals and for the 
290  composting process. 
291  The wood chips heat up so it gets nice and warm for the sheep to lay on. And then 
292  you get some natural fertiliser mixed in, which is an advantage when you are going 
293  to compost it later. (Interviewee C1) 
294  This farmer said he had very good experience with using the compost as fertiliser in his hay meadows 
295  and for vegetable cultivation. 
 
3 The county Governor recommends to pollard at least every fifth or seventh year, depending on the type, age 
and growing conditions of the tree (https://www.statsforvalteren.no/vestland/landbruk-og-mat/skjult-side---
landbruk/tilskot-til-skjotsel-av-styvingstre--styving-utfort-i-soknadsaret/) 
9 
 

296  3.2.  Motivation for pollarding 
297  Survey answers on motivation for pollarding can be seen in Figure 3, they are ordered according to 
298  average value given, from lowest to highest.  
299   
300  Figure 3: Answer to the question “To what extent is the following a motivation for you to pollard?”. Rounded percentages for 
301  each category are shown when the category reached at least 4%. 
302  3.2.1.  Cultural and aesthetic values of pollarding 
303  The results of the survey show that “maintain the cultural landscape”, “pollarded trees are nice to look 
304  at” and “history and tradition” are the most important motivations for farmers to pollard. This was also 
305  reflected in the qualitative interviews. The value of the pollarded trees was sometimes described as 
306  purely aesthetic, contributing to a landscape that is pleasant to look at, such as by this farmer:  
307  It is perhaps first and foremost as a landscape element. I think they are incredibly 
308  beautiful, these trees. (Interviewee B2) 
309  In addition, as also the survey results show, for many of the interviewed farmers the history and 
310  tradition of pollarding seemed to motivate them to pollard:  
311  It is to keep the tradition, and it’s a nice way to show the history as well. That you 
312  see historical signs in the landscape. (Interviewee A1) 
313  The aesthetic, cultural and historical values of pollarding were closely related and can be difficult to 
314  disentangle from one another: 
315  Because nice pollarded trees are nice sculptures really, in the landscape, because 
316  they are telling a story. (Interviewee A2) 
317  Most of the interviewed farmers talked about their own appreciation of the pollarded trees, but a 
318  couple also mentioned the pleasure that others take in looking at pollarded trees, such as this farmer: 
319  Many people say it when they go hiking here, that they (the pollards) are nice to 
320  look at. (Interviewee C1) 
321  The respondents to the survey answered that most of (58%) or some (38%) of their pollarded trees are 
322  visible for others along the main road, or near hiking trails. However, the survey also shows that 
10 
 

323  tourism is not a major motivation for pollarding, which may reflect the fact that although many 
324  tourists come to the area, few farmers rely on tourism. 
325  3.2.2.  Biodiversity 
326  In the survey, the majority (69%) answered that protecting biodiversity was a somewhat important or 
327  important motivation for pollarding, while for 17% it was very important.  
328  Even though most of the interviewees acknowledged that pollarding probably has a positive effect on 
329  biodiversity, most did not mention it when asked with an open question about their motivation for 
330  pollarding. However, for some the effect on biodiversity was one of their most important motivations, 
331  such as these farmers: 
332  It (pollarding) creates habitats and provides biodiversity. That is a minus with 
333  production and monoculture, so in that context pollarding is very important. 
334  (Interviewee B2) 
335  So I think (…) it has a certain function for biodiversity (…) that’s something that 
336  concerns me a lot (…) and I think I have read about some fungi and other things 
337  that are adapted to these trees. (Interviewee A1) 
338  Those interviewees for which biodiversity was extra important, often showed a great interest in, and 
339  knowledge of biodiversity and how ecosystems function. One farmer described how his main 
340  motivation for pollarding was his interest in biodiversity and to keep an open cultural landscape with a 
341  rich plant life: 
342  If nobody was pollarding the vegetation would be different. You would have had 
343  more shade-tolerant plants, and less of the light demanding herbs growing on 
344  shallow soil. (Interviewee C1) 
345  The survey shows that 48% of the farmers gather the fallen branches and leave them to rot in piles in 
346  their farm area, instead of burning the piles. Many of the interviewees emphasised that this was, at 
347  least partly, in consideration of biodiversity: 
348  We try to gather the branches and burn them, but often we put it in a pile and let it 
349  be. I’m thinking more and more that this is a better way, biologically. (Interviewee 
350  A1) 
351  Sometimes we have made piles and planned to burn them, but then spring comes, 
352  and they are full of life, so we can’t burn them! As a result, we have piles of 
353  branches that are 20-30 years old. (Interviewee D1) 
354  One farmer had noticed that bumblebees often nest in his piles and was convinced that this had been a 
355  great advantage in a particularly cold spring when only bumblebees were active early enough to 
356  pollinate his plum trees. Since then, he decided to keep some of the willow that sprung up, as this is an 
357  especially important food resource for bumblebee queens early in the season.  
358  3.2.3.  Grants 
359  The survey results show that the grant is an important motivation for pollarding, but it is ranked lower 
360  than both cultural and aesthetic values and biodiversity, and for 24% of the farmers it is not or to a 
361  very little degree a motivator (Figure 3). During the qualitative interviews, none of the farmers said the 
362  grant was the most important motivating factor for pollarding, but several said they believed the other 
363  farmers in the area pollarded mainly because of the grant. One farmer told a story of his father who 
364  wanted to remove some pollarded trees, but when he told him about the grant, he was persuaded not 
365  to. One farmer said that he started pollarding because of the grant, but later came to appreciate the 
11 
 

366  aesthetic values of the pollarded trees and this was now a more important motivation. Several farmers 
367  claimed that without the grant they would probably still pollard, but not to the same extent as today. 
368  For example, this farmer said: 
369  Maybe if there was no grant you would have said: “Well, I’ll do it next year”, and 
370  then it wouldn’t happen. (Interviewee D2) 
371  Likewise, one farmer said he would probably not have established new pollards without the grant. To 
372  the survey question if they had ever pollarded without receiving a grant, 82% answered “yes” while 
373  10% were unsure. 
374  During some of the interviews, it became clear that some farmers did not know how the grant system 
375  works, such as the size of the grant, the maximum number of pollarded trees they could get grants for, 
376  and that they could only get grants for trees already pollarded. Few had very clear opinions about 
377  whether they thought the grant was high enough or should be higher, but there were some who 
378  expressed that the hourly payment for the work was low, while others thought it was quite good.  
379  It’s an ok fee for the trees, but at the same time if you look at all of it, that you clear 
380  around and maintain the cultural landscape, it should be this much to stimulate it. 
381  Because the equipment costs a bit too, actually. (Interviewee D3) 
382  No, I can’t remember what it was, 500 per tree? (…) It’s probably ok. I don’t have a 
383  strong opinion about it, really. (Interviewee D2) 
384  When asked in the survey if they were content with the grant, 62% answered yes, 18% said no and 
385  20% were unsure. Of the 25 who said no, 16 farmers were discontented with the grant sum, 14 with 
386  how often you could apply for the grant, and 12 were discontented with the fact that you could only 
387  get a grant for a new tree if it replaced an old one. 
388  Some of the interviewed farmers explained that the grant was important not because of the money they 
389  received to their bank accounts, but because it made it easier to make pollarding a routine: 
390  I guess I would have done it to a certain degree, but now it’s more on the schedule, 
391  as a routine because you must fulfil what you have applied for. So, it becomes a 
392  reminder, and you are trumped to do it. But I guess I would have pollarded 
393  anyway, but it would have been more occasional and sporadic. (Interviewee C1) 
394   
395  3.2.4.  Fodder  
396  As previously described, very few farmers used the pollarded branches as animal fodder in the 
397  traditional way (bundled as “kjerv”). However, during interviews it became clear that many of the 
398  farmers were aware that leaves contain minerals that are important for animal health, and especially 
399  useful for feeding sick animals which lose their appetite (for hay):  
400  I have had animals that have been ill and not wanting to eat, but if you have 
401  leafage, they will eat it. It’s very strange. So, I think it’s very good to have some 
402  now with the lambing. Because there are always some getting a bit ill and then it’s 
403  amazing…it’s like there is something special about leafage. I only have ash 
404  leafage, so I have no experience with anything else. I know my father said ash 
405  leafage was considered medicine. D2 
406  Some of the interviewed farmers believed foliage could replace feed concentrate if harvested in 
407  sufficient amounts. Many also remarked that the animals were very keen on eating the foliage from the 
408  pollarded branches, and that they would gather around the tree, eating as the branches fell down.  
12 
 

409  It’s very strange, in the autumn, when I come with the saw and start sawing the 
410  tree, then before the first branch has fallen the sheep are there. So that’s a bit fun. 
411  (Interviewee A2) 
412  The survey results show that using pollarded trees as fodder is mainly seen as important because the 
413  animals like it and it benefits animal health, and for only 6 farmers it is rather or very important as a 
414  contribution to fodder (Figure 4).  
415   
416  Figure 4: Answer to the question “What is the significance of the fodder resources you obtain from pollarding?”. The 
417  question was given to the 104 farmers who answered that they had given pollarded branches to livestock (N = 104). Rounded 
418  percentages for each category are shown when the category reached at least 4%. 
419  In interviews, several farmers talked about how pollarding was done historically, and some of the older 
420  informants could remember from their childhood when pollarding was important for fodder 
421  acquisition. One farmer explained: 
422  Traditionally pollarding was very important here on this farm. Because it’s on the 
423  sunny side and the soil is rather shallow, so often it would happen that the grass 
424  would disappear. Then we had to resort to pollarding, because there the harvest 
425  would remain high. (Interviewee C1) 
426  However, all the interviewed farmers considered it far too much work to pollard and make “kjerv” in 
427  sufficient amounts for it to contribute significantly to fodder volume. 
428  I have maybe tried it once for fun, but not more. It is too much work and takes too 
429  much time. (Interviewee C2) 
430  3.2.5.  Other motivations for pollarding 
431  During interviews, farmers mentioned different practical benefits of having solitary, pollarded trees in 
432  their fields. These potential benefits were added to the questionnaire (see Figure 3). Among these 
433  benefits, having trees with roots binding the soil and hindering erosion was the most important. Some 
434  also pollard because if not there would be too much shadow in the field, which would reduce grass 
435  growth, while others do it because they want a better view. Pollarding to get firewood was less 
436  important, which is interesting because most of the farmers do it, at least sometimes (Figure 2). The 
437  reason could be, as several farmers explained, that if they need firewood, it is much easier to cut down 
438  entire trees, which farmers usually have plenty of in these areas. 
13 
 

439  3.3.  Challenges with pollarding 
440  As previously described, pollarding trees can be time consuming and hard work. It is also not without 
441  risk, especially when branches are long and thick and there is a danger of losing control because they 
442  may crack unexpectedly, especially ash trees. Most of the farmers mentioned the hazards related to 
443  pollarding, but only one of the interviewed farmers told us about an accident when he was injured; he 
444  was severely hit by a branch when pollarding with a telescope saw without wearing a helmet. 
445  When asked in the survey about disadvantages of pollarding, hazardous work was the most important, 
446  followed by that it takes valuable time, and that the work is hard and tiresome (Figure 5). But there are 
447  more respondents who feel that these factors are not disadvantages, compared to those who think they 
448  are to a large degree. Very few are concerned with the disadvantages of trees or branches taking up 
449  valuable space, or reduction of grass production. 
450   
451  Figure 5: Answer to the question “To what degree would you say that the following are disadvantages of pollarding?”. 
452  Rounded percentages for each category are shown when the category reached at least 4%. 
453  Pollarding can also be a challenge for the trees. In the survey, 10% answer “yes” and 24% “possibly” 
454  to the question if they have lost trees because they did not survive the pollarding (Figure 6). Many had 
455  also lost trees because of tree diseases or insect attacks, which can be linked to the ash dieback disease 
456  spreading in the area in this time period (Timmermann et al. 2017). Of those farmers who had lost 
457  trees to diseases or insect attacks, 67% answered that it was ash, while 16% had lost elm trees, 12% 
458  had lost birch and 10% willow. In the interviews, the ash dieback disease was a concern for many of 
459  the farmers, some of whom had a large number of ash trees that they pollarded. Other dangers for the 
460  trees are barkstripping by deer or windthrow. Some had also possibly lost pollarded trees because of 
461  drought. The high degree of uncertainty in the answers indicate that it is not always easy for the 
462  farmers to know what caused the death of their pollard. This is as expected, since the death can be 
463  caused by a combination of factors, including the pollarding itself.  
14 
 

464   
465  Figure 6: Answer to the question “Did any of your pollards die from any of the following reasons?”. Rounded percentages for 
466  each category are shown when the category reached at least 4%. 
467  We asked those who had removed pollards the reason why, and three farmers answered that the trees 
468  were blocking machine harvesting, while seven were going to use the area for something else.  
469  To avoid trees from dying because of pollarding, knowledge is important. In both the interviews and 
470  survey, questions were asked about knowledge acquisition. The survey results show that most of the 
471  respondents had learned it from the previous farm owners, for instance parents or grandparents, hence 
472  a direct knowledge transfer taking place on the farm. Some also claimed that they were self-taught 
473  through trial and error, and almost the same amount had learned it from written information or on the 
474  internet.  
475  Table 3. Answer to the question «How did you get knowledge about pollarding/restoring pollards? 
Percen
   t 
Learned it from those who ran the farm earlier (for instance parents or grandparents)  62% 
I am mainly self-taught (have learned from trial and error)  32% 
Read about the procedures in leaflet or on internet (for instance the county governor’s pages on 
maintenance of pollards)  30% 
Learned it from other relatives, neighbours or acquaintances   12% 
Went to a course/talked with an expert  11% 
Other  4% 
476   
477  When asked if they needed more information about pollarding, 44% answered “No”, while 51% 
478  answered “yes, some need” while only 6% answered “yes, a great need”.  
479  When asked how likely it is that they will continue with pollarding the next 10 years, 91% answer that 
480  it is likely or very likely, the rest believing it to be very unlikely (3,6%) or somewhat unlikely (6%). 
Discussion 
481 
482  Trees have for thousands of years provided important ecosystem services to humans, one of these is 
483  fodder for livestock. In western Norway, pollarding trees was an agricultural practice of vital 
484  importance, but today the economic returns of fodder provision from pollarding are too low to be 
15 
 

485  worthwhile for farmers (Austad et al. 2003a). To prevent the abandonment of the pollarding practice, 
486  public authorities provide grants to farmers for each tree they pollard (maximum 70 trees per year).  
487  For the farmers participating in our qualitative interviews and survey, the bioresources obtained from 
488  pollarding have lost most of its previous significance. Some farmers still use the foliage as fodder, but 
489  more for the sake of animal welfare and health benefits than as a contribution to fodder volumes. 
490  Many farmers use the larger branches from pollarded trees as firewood, and a very small number make 
491  wood chips that are used as bedding for farm animals and sometimes composted and used as fertiliser. 
492  But most of the branches and twigs remain unused and are dispersed in heaps that are burnt or left 
493  decaying in the field.  
494  Some farmers are motivated to pollard because of the erosion control and sheltering functions it 
495  provides to animals, but for most of the farmers in our study, the ecosystem services obtained from 
496  pollarding are first and foremost related to cultural and aesthetic values, which is in line with studies 
497  of agroforestry in other parts of the world (Burel and Baudry 1995; Fleming et al. 2019). In interviews, 
498  the farmers describe how they appreciate a landscape with pollarded trees because of the cultural 
499  heritage it represents. The practice of and knowledge about pollarding has been transmitted through 
500  generations up until the present, and the pollards are thus examples of culturally modified trees that 
501  offer opportunities to reconnect with the past, a phenomenon also found in many other parts of the 
502  world (Blicharska and Mikusiński 2014). Most of the farmers have pollarded trees that are visible to 
503  others from roads or hiking trails, and some of those interviewed mention that they know their pollards 
504  are appreciated by others. Still, more research on this topic is required to gain knowledge on to what 
505  extent the general population recognise pollarded trees, know about the historical context they were 
506  created in and appreciate their aesthetic and cultural values the way the farmers do. 
507  The results of this study show that pollarded trees in Western Norway are mainly situated on farmed 
508  land, which means they grow as solitary trees in the landscape, which have large benefits to 
509  biodiversity, especially relative to their modest spatial occupancy and relatively low biomass of each 
510  tree (Manning et al. 2006; Prevedello et al. 2018). Because the interviewed farmers had little 
511  knowledge about the ages of their trees, we did not ask questions about this in the survey. But 
512  observations of old pollards made during farm visits, and the fact that 64% of the respondents had 
513  restored trees that had not been pollarded for more than 20 years, indicate that there are many old, 
514  pollarded trees in the region, which are important habitats for different species, also because they are 
515  more likely to be hollow (Sebek et al. 2013). 
516  Newly established pollarded trees may not immediately provide the same biodiversity benefits as their 
517  older counterparts, due to factors such as size, age and habitat qualities. However, when these pollards 
518  are consistently maintained over time, they have the potential to surpass unmanaged trees in age, 
519  ultimately becoming vital contributors to future biodiversity. This is especially important as the most 
520  common pollarded tree species (ash and elm) are key stone species of Norwegian temperate deciduous 
521  woodlands, which constitute just over 1% of the total forest cover, but are among the most species rich 
522  forests in Norway, hosting ~30% of the forest-associated red-listed species (Henriksen and Hilmo 
523  2015).  
524  It should be noted that, although pollarding can contribute to an enhancement of biodiversity, our 
525  results also show that if not done correctly pollarding can also damage or even kill old trees: 34% of 
526  the respondents had or had maybe lost trees due to pollarding. Especially when restoring old pollards, 
527  or if the trees are already in peril due to barkstripping by deer or tree diseases, they need to be 
528  managed with care. The noteworthy mortality observed in pollarded ash trees is consistent with the 
529  larger pattern of ash dieback within the study region (Timmermann et al. 2023). Despite the recent 
530  introduction of the disease to this area, initially observed in 2011, its impact has been profound. By 
531  2022, an alarming 52% of the ash trees had died, with an additional 15% were experiencing severe 
532  damage or in the process of dying, while 20% where still healthy (Timmermann et al. 2023). 
16 
 

| results also show that if not done correctly pollarding can also damage or even kill old trees: 34% of   |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| the respondents had or had maybe lost trees due to pollarding. Especially when restoring old pollards,   |
| or if the trees are already in peril due to barkstripping by deer or tree diseases, they need to be      |
| managed with care. The noteworthy mortality observed in pollarded ash trees is consistent with the       |
| larger pattern of ash dieback within the study region (Timmermann et al. 2023). Despite the recent       |
| introduction of the disease to this area, initially observed in 2011, its impact has been profound. By   |
| 2022, an alarming 52% of the ash trees had died, with an additional 15% were experiencing severe         |
| damage or in the process of dying, while 20% where still healthy (Timmermann et al. 2023).               |

533  Bengtsson et al. (2021) found that time since pollarding influenced the mortality of ash trees, and 
534  therefore recommend to only pollard ash trees that are in a regular cutting cycle and do not show any 
535  symptoms of ash dieback. Provision of information to the pollarding farmers is therefore highly 
536  important. 
537  Our study shows that many farmers let the branches or twigs from the pollarded trees decay in heaps 
538  outside in the field, which increases the structural complexity of the landscape and provides nesting 
539  opportunities for animals (e.g. Brin et al. 2011). It is interesting to note that farmers are doing this 
540  against the advice of the county governor providing the pollarding grant, who wants the pollarded area 
541  to be “neat and tidy”. This shows that in the formation of the pollarding policy the aims of achieving 
542  both ecological and the aesthetic values are balanced against each other, something which is typical in 
543  the management of cultural landscapes (Tyrväinen et al. 2003). In this case the aesthetic values of a 
544  tidy area get priority over biodiversity, but our study shows that the policy aims are not necessarily 
545  reached, as farmers do not always follow recommendations. 
546  In line with studies by Sandberg and Jakobsson (2018) and Blanco et al. (2019) our results show that 
547  for the farmers, aesthetic and cultural values of pollarded trees are more important than their effect on 
548  biodiversity. However, some farmers seem to have a strong interest in and knowledge about 
549  biodiversity and how pollarding may affect it. The grant does not appear to be the most important 
550  motivator for pollarding, aligning with previous research on farmer motivation for participation in 
551  agri-environmental schemes (Blanco et al. 2019; Brown et al. 2021; Gatto et al. 2019). However, 
552  although the money itself may not be the main motivator, for some farmers the grant application 
553  deadline seems to work as a reminder to get the pollarding done.  
554  A reason why the grant money itself does not seem to be very important, could be that livestock 
555  farmers in Norway already receive substantial amounts of subsidies (around 75% of sheep farmers’ 
556  income are from subsidies (Gaasland 2020), and the pollarding grant is small in comparison. In 
557  Norway there is strong public support for agricultural subsidies to ensure agricultural employment 
558  opportunities in rural and marginalised areas (Mittenzwei et al. 2016; Vik 2020). A major part of the 
559  subsidies to livestock farmers are given per animal, which means it does not necessarily imply 
560  maintenance of cultural landscapes. Subsidies linked to production can reinforce a productivist, 
561  conventional agricultural regime, reliant on imported feed and high consumption of meat, with 
562  corresponding negative impacts on biodiversity, greenhouse gas emissions and public health (Loeng 
563  and Korsnes 2023). Subsidies earmarked for pollarding do not have such consequences. However, 
564  previous studies have found that many farmers prefer to get their income from their food production 
565  activities rather than receiving subsidies for landscape maintenance (Brown et al. 2021; Kvakkestad et 
566  al. 2015). Contrary to these previous results, our study shows that pollarding is perceived as 
567  meaningful work in several ways. Furthermore, unlike previous studies (Rivest et al. 2013), we find 
568  that very few farmers are concerned about the negative impact of pollarded trees on farm production. 
569  Rydgren et al. (2021) found that wooded hay meadows with pollarded trees can function as a 
570  sustainable, biodiversity enhancing agricultural system that does not compromise food production. 
571  Our study shows that, although the bioresources provided by pollarding are to some extent taken into 
572  use by the farmers, it is not economically profitable to use the foliage as fodder due to the high work 
573  load it requires. Hence, for this to again become a common practice there is need for stronger 
574  stimulation, most efficiently in the form of grants earmarked for this purpose. Such a policy would be 
575  in line with Sandberg and Jakobsson (2018), who argues that for agricultural policy to instigate 
576  sustainability, there is need for a shift away from a strong production-oriented farming into more 
577  diverse land use practices to support biodiversity. 
578  Continuing to give grants to activities such as pollarding is recommended because it is a way to 
579  support sustainable, traditional farming practices and preservation of cultural landscapes. Potentially, 
580  pollarding can provide a more sustainable source of fodder than imported feed and contribute to 
17 
 

| Bengtsson et al. (2021) found that time since pollarding influenced the mortality of ash trees, and   |
|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| therefore recommend to only pollard ash trees that are in a regular cutting cycle and do not show any |
| symptoms of ash dieback. Provision of information to the pollarding farmers is therefore highly       |
| important.                                                                                            |

| against the advice of the county governor providing the pollarding grant, who wants the pollarded area   |
|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| to be “neat and tidy”. This shows that in the formation of the pollarding policy the aims of achieving   |
| both ecological and the aesthetic values are balanced against each other, something which is typical in  |
| the management of cultural landscapes (Tyrväinen et al. 2003). In this case the aesthetic values of a    |
| tidy area get priority over biodiversity, but our study shows that the policy aims are not necessarily   |
| reached, as farmers do not always follow recommendations.                                                |

581  increased self-sufficiency and food security without compromising biodiversity (e.g. Barthel et al. 
582  2013). With climate change and the prospects of more insecure access to food and feed (Gomez-
583  Zavaglia et al. 2020), there will be an increased need for more sustainable, resilient agricultural 
584  systems, such as those provided by pollarding trees in hay meadows (Rydgren et al. 2021). It is 
585  therefore of interest that the tradition is kept alive. 
Conclusion 
586 
587  Pollarding in western Norway was traditionally practised mainly for fodder acquisition. Our study 
588  shows that today, although few pollarding farmers consider it to give an important contribution to their 
589  fodder volume, many still give the foliage to livestock for animal welfare and health reasons. Farmers 
590  also appreciate other ecosystem services from having pollarded trees on their hay meadows or 
591  pastures, primarily the aesthetic values which also reconnect them with traditions of the past, in 
592  addition to more practical benefits such as sheltering and erosion control. For some farmers, 
593  biodiversity is also an important motivation to pollard. For policy implications, our results indicate 
594  that sharing information about the cultural heritage of pollarding and the benefits it may have on 
595  biodiversity, to farmers as well as to the general public, can be an important part of a strategy to 
596  uphold pollarding. Furthermore, it seems likely that without the economic incentives from the public 
597  grant, pollarding would to some extent continue, but it would be done more sporadically, and with less 
598  establishment of new pollarded trees, which is important for the long-term sustainability of this 
599  system. Upholding pollarding in this region therefore seem to require the continuation of a grant 
600  scheme. To provide additional benefits to biodiversity, it could also be considered to revise the advice 
601  against piling branches in heaps instead of burning. 
References 
602 
603   
604  Austad I, Braanaas A, Haltvik M (2003a) Lauv som ressurs: Ny bruk av gammel kunnskap(Vol. 4). 
605  Høgskulen i Sogn og Fjordane, Sogndal 
606  Austad I, Hamre L, Rydgren K, Norderhaug A (2003b) Production in wooded hay meadows. Advances 
607  in Ecological Sciences 19:1091-1101. 10.2495/ECO030322 
608  Barthel S, Crumley C, Svedin U (2013) Bio-cultural refugia—Safeguarding diversity of practices for 
609  food security and biodiversity. Global Environmental Change 23(5):1142-1152. 
610  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2013.05.001 
611  Bengtsson V, Stenström A, Wheater CP, Sandberg K (2021) The impact of ash dieback on veteran trees 
612  in southwestern Sweden. Baltic Forestry 27(1). https://doi.org/10.46490/BF558 
613  Billen G, Aguilera E, Einarsson R, Garnier J, Gingrich S, Grizzetti B, Lassaletta L, Le Noë J, Sanz-Cobena 
614  A (2021) Reshaping the European agro-food system and closing its nitrogen cycle: The 
615  potential of combining dietary change, agroecology, and circularity. One Earth 4(6):839-850. 
616  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.oneear.2021.05.008 
617  Blanco J, Sourdril A, Deconchat M, Ladet S, Andrieu E (2019) Social drivers of rural forest dynamics: A 
618  multi-scale approach combining ethnography, geomatic and mental model analysis. 
619  Landscape and Urban Planning 188:132-142. 
620  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2018.02.005 
621  Blicharska M, Mikusiński G (2014) Incorporating Social and Cultural Significance of Large Old Trees in 
622  Conservation Policy. Conservation Biology 28(6):1558-1567. 
623  https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.12341 
624  Bobiec A, Podlaski R, Ortyl B, Korol M, Havryliuk S, Öllerer K, Ziobro JM, Pilch K, Dychkevych V, Dudek 
625  T, Mázsa K, Varga A, Angelstam P (2019) Top-down segregated policies undermine the 
626  maintenance of traditional wooded landscapes: Evidence from oaks at the European Union’s 
627  eastern border. Landscape and Urban Planning 189:247-259. 
628  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2019.04.026 
18 
 

629  Brin A, Bouget C, Brustel H, Jactel H (2011) Diameter of downed woody debris does matter for 
630  saproxylic beetle assemblages in temperate oak and pine forests. Journal of Insect 
631  Conservation 15(5):653-669. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10841-010-9364-5 
632  Brown C, Kovács E, Herzon I, Villamayor-Tomas S, Albizua A, Galanaki A, Grammatikopoulou I, 
633  McCracken D, Olsson JA, Zinngrebe Y (2021) Simplistic understandings of farmer motivations 
634  could undermine the environmental potential of the common agricultural policy. Land Use 
635  Policy 101:105136. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2020.105136 
636  Burel F, Baudry J (1995) Social, aesthetic and ecological aspects of hedgerows in rural landscapes as a 
637  framework for greenways. Landscape and Urban Planning 33(1-3):327-340. 
638  https://doi.org/10.1016/0169-2046(94)02026-C 
639  Cálix M, Alexander KNA, Nieto A, Dodelin B, Soldati F, Telnov D, Vazquez-Albalate X, Aleksandrowicz O, 
640  Audisio P, Istrate P, Jansson N, Legakis A, Liberto A, Makris C, Merkl O, Mugerwa Pettersson R, 
641  Schlaghamersky J, Bologna MA, Brustel H, Buse J, Novák V, Purchart L (2018) European Red 
642  List of Saproxylic Beetles. IUCN, Brussels 
643  Castro A, Martínez de Murguía L, Fernandez Perez J, Casis A, Molino Olmedo F (2013) Size and quality 
644  of wood used by Rosalia alpina (Linnaeus, 1758) (Coleoptera: Cerambycidae) in beech 
645  woodlands of Gipuzkoa (northern Spain). Munibe (Ciencias Naturales-Natur Zientziak) 0214-
646  7688 60:77-100 
647  County Governor Vestland (2019) Regional Environmental programme for Vestland 2019-2022. 
648  Vestland. https://www.statsforvalteren.no/vestland/landbruk-og-mat/tilskot-innan-jordbruk-
649  og-skogbruk/regionalt-miljoprogram/ 
650  Cusens J, Barraclough AD, Måren IE (2024) Socio-cultural values and biophysical supply: How do 
651  afforestation and land abandonment impact multiple ecosystem services? Land Use Policy 
652  136:106967. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2023.106967 
653  Davidson-Hunt I (2003) Learning as You Journey: Anishinaabe Perception of Social-ecological 
654  Environments and Adaptive Learning. Conservation Ecology 8(1). 
655  http://dx.doi.org/10.5751/ES-00587-080105 
656  Dittrich A, von Wehrden H, Abson DJ, Bartkowski B, Cord AF, Fust P, Hoyer C, Kambach S, Meyer MA, 
657  Radzevičiūtė R, Nieto-Romero M, Seppelt R, Beckmann M (2017) Mapping and analysing 
658  historical indicators of ecosystem services in Germany. Ecological Indicators 75:101-110. 
659  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2016.12.010 
660  Dubois GF, Vignon V, Delettre YR, Rantier Y, Vernon P, Burel F (2009) Factors affecting the occurrence 
661  of the endangered saproxylic beetle Osmoderma eremita (Scopoli, 1763) (Coleoptera: 
662  Cetoniidae) in an agricultural landscape. Landscape and Urban Planning 91(3):152-159. 
663  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2008.12.009 
664  Fleming A, O’Grady AP, Mendham D, England J, Mitchell P, Moroni M, Lyons A (2019) Understanding 
665  the values behind farmer perceptions of trees on farms to increase adoption of agroforestry 
666  in Australia. Agronomy for Sustainable Development 39(9). https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-
667  019-0555-5 
668  Garner A (2004) Living History: Trees and Metaphors of Identity in an English Forest. Journal of 
669  Material Culture 9(1):87-100. https://doi.org/10.1177/1359183504041091 
670  Gatto P, Mozzato D, Defrancesco E (2019) Analysing the role of factors affecting farmers’ decisions to 
671  continue with agri-environmental schemes from a temporal perspective. Environmental 
672  Science & Policy 92:237-244. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2018.12.001 
673  Gomez-Zavaglia A, Mejuto JC, Simal-Gandara J (2020) Mitigation of emerging implications of climate 
674  change on food production systems. Food Research International 134:109256. 
675  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2020.109256 
676  Guimarães M, Pinto-Correia T, Belém M, Costa Freitas MB, Ferraz de Oliveira MI, Baptista E, Veiga F, 
677  Marques J, Pinto-Cruz C, Godinho C, Belo A (2023) Farming for nature in the Montado: the 
678  application of ecosystem services in a results-based model. Ecosystem Services 61:101524. 
679  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2023.101524 
19 
 

680  Gustafsson L, Eriksson I (1995) Factors of Importance for the Epiphytic Vegetation of Aspen Populus 
681  tremula with Special Emphasis on Bark Chemistry and Soil Chemistry. Journal of Applied 
682  Ecology 32(2):412-424. https://doi.org/10.2307/2405107 
683  Gaasland I (2020) Norsk produksjon av jordbruksvarer – hvem betaler regningen? SNF Bergen  
684  Hauge L, Kvamme M, Austad I (2014) Lauvtrærnes innvandringshistorie og bruken av dem. In Austad I, 
685  Hauge L (eds) Trær og tradisjon: Bruk av lauvtrær i kulturlandskapet. Fagbokforlaget, Bergen, 
686  pp 23-44 
687  Henriksen S, Hilmo O (eds) (2015) Norsk rødliste for arter 2015. Artsdatabanken, Norge. 
688  http://dx.doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.1.2130.0083 
689  Høeg OA (1974) Planter og tradisjon – floraen i levende tale og tradisjon i Norge 1925-1973. 
690  Universitetsforlaget, Oslo 
691  Klein A-M, Vaissière BE, Cane JH, Steffan-Dewenter I, Cunningham SA, Kremen C, Tscharntke T (2006) 
692  Importance of pollinators in changing landscapes for world crops. Proceedings of the Royal 
693  Society B: Biological Sciences 274(1608):303-313. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2006.3721 
694  Knutsen H, Rye SKP, Jenssen E, Lund PO, Lerfald M, Bern A (2022) Verdiskaping i landbruk og 
695  landbruksbasert industri i Vestland Oppdaterte berekningar basert på tal frå 2020. NIBIO. 
696  https://hdl.handle.net/11250/3002544 
697  Kvakkestad V, Rørstad PK, Vatn A (2015) Norwegian farmers’ perspectives on agriculture and 
698  agricultural payments: Between productivism and cultural landscapes. Land Use Policy 42:83-
699  92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2014.07.009 
700  Loeng M, Korsnes M (2023) Unravelling the Norwegian meat reduction controversy: navigating 
701  contested sustainabilities and the role of meat. Consumption and Society 2(2):281-299. 
702  https://doi.org/10.1332/CXSI8930 
703  Manning AD, Fischer J, Lindenmayer DB (2006) Scattered trees are keystone structures – Implications 
704  for conservation. Biological Conservation 132(3):311-321. 
705  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2006.04.023 
706  Mittenzwei K, Mann S, Refsgaard K, Kvakkestad V (2016) Hot cognition in agricultural policy 
707  preferences in Norway? Agriculture and Human Values 33(1):61-71. 
708  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10460-015-9597-8 
709  Moen A (1999) National Atlas of Norway: Vegetation. Norwegian Mapping Authority, Hønefoss 
710  Mosquera-Losada MR, Santiago-Freijanes JJ, Rois-Díaz M, Moreno G, den Herder M, Aldrey-Vázquez 
711  JA, Ferreiro-Domínguez N, Pantera A, Pisanelli A, Rigueiro-Rodríguez A (2018) Agroforestry in 
712  Europe: A land management policy tool to combat climate change. Land Use Policy 78:603-
713  613. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2018.06.052 
714  Prevedello JA, Almeida-Gomes M, Lindenmayer DB (2018) The importance of scattered trees for 
715  biodiversity conservation: A global meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Ecology 55(1):205-214. 
716  https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2664.12943 
717  Ranius T (2002) Population ecology and conservation of beetles and pseudoscorpions living in hollow 
718  oaks in Sweden. Animal Biodiversity and Conservation 25(1) 
719  Ranius T, Johansson P, Berg N, Niklasson M (2008) The influence of tree age and microhabitat quality 
720  on the occurrence of crustose lichens associated with old oaks. Journal of Vegetation Science 
721  19(5):653-662. https://doi.org/10.3170/2008-8-18433 
722  Read H (2000) How a tree grows, becomes old and decays. In Veteran Trees: A guide to good 
723  management. English Nature, pp 25-34 
724  Rivest D, Paquette A, Moreno G, Messier C (2013) A meta-analysis reveals mostly neutral influence of 
725  scattered trees on pasture yield along with some contrasted effects depending on functional 
726  groups and rainfall conditions. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment 165:74-79. 
727  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2012.12.010 
728  Rolo V, Roces-Diaz JV, Torralba M, Kay S, Fagerholm N, Aviron S, Burgess P, Crous-Duran J, Ferreiro-
729  Dominguez N, Graves A, Hartel T, Mantzanas K, Mosquera-Losada MR, Palma JHN, 
730  Sidiropoulou A, Szerencsits E, Viaud V, Herzog F, Plieninger T, Moreno G (2021) Mixtures of 
20 
 

731  forest and agroforestry alleviate trade-offs between ecosystem services in European rural 
732  landscapes. Ecosystem Services 50:101318. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2021.101318 
733  Ruczyński I, Bogdanowicz W (2008) Summer Roost Selection by Tree-Dwelling Bats Nyctalus noctula 
734  and N. leisleri: A Multiscale Analysis. Journal of Mammalogy 89(4):942-951. 
735  https://doi.org/10.1644/07-MAMM-A-134.1 
736  Rydgren K, Austad I, Hamre LN, Töpper JP (2021) Wooded hay meadows as viable production systems 
737  in sustainable small-scale farming. Agroforestry Systems 95(1):165-176. 
738  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10457-020-00570-x 
739  Sandberg M, Jakobsson S (2018) Trees are all around us: Farmers' management of wood pastures in 
740  the light of a controversial policy. Journal of Environmental Management 212:228-235. 
741  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2018.02.004 
742  Schei FH, Blom HH, Gjerde I, Grytnes J-A, Heegaard E, Sætersdal M (2013) Conservation of epiphytes: 
743  Single large or several small host trees? Biological Conservation 168:144-151. 
744  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2013.10.001 
745  Schleyer C, Plieninger T (2011) Obstacles and options for the design and implementation of payment 
746  schemes for ecosystem services provided through farm trees in Saxony, Germany. 
747  Environmental Conservation 38:454-463. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0376892911000361 
748  Sebek P, Altman J, Platek M, Cizek L (2013) Is active management the key to the conservation of 
749  saproxylic biodiversity? Pollarding promotes the formation of tree hollows. PLoS One 
750  8(3):e60456. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0060456 
751  Simelton E, Carew-Reid J, Coulier M, Damen B, Howell J, Pottinger-Glass C, Tran HV, Van Der Meiren M 
752  (2021) NBS Framework for Agricultural Landscapes. Frontiers in Environmental Science 9. 
753  https://doi.org/10.3389/fenvs.2021.678367 
754  Smith J, Westaway S, Whistance L (2020) Tree fodder in UK livestock systems: opportunities and 
755  barriers. Fourrages 242:49-53 
756  Snäll T, Ribeiro Jr P, Rydin H (2003) Spatial occurrence and colonisations in patch-tracking 
757  metapopulations: Local conditions versus dispersal. Oikos 103:566-578. 
758  https://doi.org/10.1034/j.1600-0706.2003.12551.x 
759  Statistics Norway (2023a) Holdings, agricultural area and livestock.  Accessed December 18, 2023 
760  https://www.ssb.no/en/statbank/table/11506/ 
761  Statistics Norway (2023b) Land use and land cover.  Accessed December 18, 2023 
762  https://www.ssb.no/en/natur-og-miljo/areal/statistikk/arealbruk-og-arealressurser 
763  Sydenham MAK, Häusler LD, Moe SR, Eldegard K (2016) Inter-assemblage facilitation: the functional 
764  diversity of cavity-producing beetles drives the size diversity of cavity-nesting bees. Ecology 
765  and Evolution 6(2):412-425. https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.1871 
766  R Core Team (2023) R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for 
767  Statistical Computing, Vienna, Australia.  https://www.R-project.org/ 
768  Timmermann V, Børja I, Clarke N, Gohli J, Hietala AM, Jepsen JU, Krokene P, Lislegård HH, Nagy NE, 
769  Nyeggen H, Solberg S, Solheim H, Solvin TM, Svensson A, Tollefsrud MM, Vindstad OPL, 
770  Økland B, Aas W (2023) Skogens helsetilstand i Norge. Resultater fra skogskadeovervåkingen i 
771  2022. NIBIO. https://hdl.handle.net/10037/31823 
772  Timmermann V, Nagy N, Hietala A, Børja I, Solheim H (2017) Progression of ash dieback in Norway 
773  related to tree age, disease history and regional aspects. Baltic Forestry 23:150-158.  
774  Turner N, Ari Y, Davidson-Hunt I, Ertug Z, Miller A (2009) Cultural Management of Living Trees: An 
775  International Perspective. Journal of Ethnobiology 29:237-270. https://doi.org/10.2993/0278-
776  0771-29.2.237 
777  Tyrväinen L, Silvennoinen H, Kolehmainen O (2003) Ecological and aesthetic values in urban forest 
778  management. Urban Forestry & Urban Greening 1(3):135-149. https://doi.org/10.1078/1618-
779  8667-00014 
780  van Zanten BT, Verburg P, Espinosa M, Gomez y Paloma S, Galimberti G, Kantelhardt J, Kapfer M, 
781  Lefebvre M, Manrique R, Piorr A, Raggi M, Schaller L, Targetti S, Zasada I, Viaggi D (2013) 
782  European agricultural landscapes, common agricultural policy and ecosystem services: A 
21 
 

783  review. Agronomy for Sustainable Development 34. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13593-013-
784  0183-4 
785  Vik J (2020) The agricultural policy trilemma: On the wicked nature of agricultural policy making. Land 
786  Use Policy 99:105059. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2020.105059 
787  Visted K, Stigum H (1971) Vår gamle bondekultur: Bind 1. Cappelen, Oslo 
788  Wickham H, Averick M, Bryan J, Chang W, McGowan LD, François R, Grolemund G, Hayes A, Henry L, 
789  Hester J, Kuhn M, Pedersen TL, Miller E, Bache SM, Müller K, Ooms J, Robinson D, Seidel DP, 
790  Spinu V, Takahashi K, Vaughan D, Wilke C, Woo K, Yutani H (2019) Welcome to the tidyverse. 
791  Journal of Open Source Software 4(43):1686. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.01686 
792  Zahl-Thanem A, Melås AM (2020) Trender i norsk landbruk 2020. Ruralis, Trondheim  
793  Żmihorski M, Romanowski J, Osojca G (2009) Habitat preferences of a declining population of the 
794  little owl, Athene noctua in Central Poland. Folia Zoologica -Praha- 58:207-215 
795   
22 
 