 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bradford Protein Assay 
 
 
 
 
 
Date: September, 30th 2018 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 

   
 
Bradford Protein Assay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Content 
 
1 Summary Information .................................................................................................. 3 
1.1 Partner Summary .......................................................................................................................... 3 
1.2 SOP Summary ............................................................................................................................... 4 
2 Protocol Steps ............................................................................................................. 5 
Equipment .......................................................................................................................................... 5 
Extraction Process .............................................................................................................................. 5 
Reagents ............................................................................................................................................. 6 
Assay ................................................................................................................................................... 6 
Calculation Process ............................................................................................................................ 7 
Comments ........................................................................................................................................... 7 
Additional References ........................................................................................................................ 8 
3 Linked SOPs ................................................................................................................ 9 
4 Disclaimer ................................................................................................................... 9 
5 Copyright .................................................................................................................... 9 
6 Citation ...................................................................................................................... 9 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 2 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
2 

   
 
Bradford Protein Assay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 Summary Information 
 
1.1 Partner Summary 
 
SOP Code   EU_TRUE_SOP_015 
TRUE Partner Acronym  AUA 
Primary Author  Ntatsi, Georgia (ntatsi@aua.gr) 
Other Authors  Savvas, Dimitrios 
 
M.M. Bradford, 1976. A rapid and sensitive method for 
the  quantitation  of  microgram  quantities  of  protein 
Linked Reference and Hyperlink 
utilizing  the  principle  of  protein–dye  binding.  Anal. 
(if available) 
Biochem., 72, pp. 248-254 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0003-2697(76)90527-3 
 
Associated files to use with the SOP 
NA 
[and function] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 3 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
3 

| SOP Code                             |
|:-------------------------------------|
| TRUE Partner Acronym                 |
| Primary Author                       |
| Other Authors                        |
| Linked Reference and Hyperlink       |
| (if available)                       |
| Associated files to use with the SOP |
| [and function]                       |

| Linked Reference and Hyperlink   |
|:---------------------------------|
| (if available)                   |

| Associated files to use with the SOP   |
|:---------------------------------------|
| [and function]                         |

   
 
Bradford Protein Assay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.2 SOP Summary 
 
Title  
 
 
Bradford protein assay 
 
 
Brief description  
 
 
Protein  concentration is determined using  a  Coomassie  brilliant  blue  with  bovine  serum 
albumin as the standard (Bradford, 1976). The assay is based on the observation that the 
absorbance maximum for an acidic solution of Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 shifts from 465 
nm to 595  nm when binding to protein occurs. Both hydrophobic and ionic interactions 
stabilise the anionic form of the dye, causing a visible color change.  
 
The  assay  is  useful since  the  extinction  coefficient  of  a  dye-albumin  complex  solution is 
constant over a 10-fold concentration range 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 4 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
4 

   
 
Bradford Protein Assay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Protocol Steps  
Equipment 
In addition to standard liquid handling supplies a visible light spectrophotometer is needed, with 
maximum transmission in the region of 595 nm, on the border of the visible spectrum (no special 
lamp or filter usually needed). Glass or polystyrene (cheap) cuvettes may be used, however the color 
reagent stains both. Disposable cuvettes are recommended (0.1 cm). 
Extraction Process 
0.1 g of each pulverized, frozen sample (leaf and root samples) was homogenised with ice-cold 
25 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.8). The HEPES buffer contained 0.2 mM EDTA, 2 mM ascorbate and 2 % 
(w/v) polyvinylpyrolidon (PVP). The homogenates were centrifuged at 4 °C and 14,000 rpm. The 
supernatants obtained were used for enzyme analysis. The procedure for enzyme extraction was 
carried out at 0-4 oC.  
 
Reagents 
 
To prepare 1 L of the necessary reagents, the following equation was used: 
 
                                                                            m = C * V * M                                            (equation 1) 
 
with    m = weight (g) 
           C = molarity (mol/L) 
           V = volume to be prepared (L) 
           MB = molecular weight (g/mol) 
 
 
•  25 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.8)  
Weigh 5.9575 g of HEPES (MB = 238.30) in a 1 L volumetric flask and adjust to 1 L with H O (m 
2
= 0.025 * 1 * 238.30). Adjust the pH to 7.8 using either a diluted solution of HCl or NaOH 
 
•  0.2 mM EDTA 
Weigh 0.0745 g of EDTA (MB = 372.24) in a 1 L volumetric flask and adjust to 1 L with H O (m = 
2
0.0002 * 1 * 372.24). 
 
•  2 mM ascorbate (AsA)  
Weigh 0.352 g of Ascorbate (MB = 176.12) in a 1 L volumetric flask and adjust to 1 L with H O 
2
(m = 0.002 * 1 * 176.12). 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 5 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
5 

   
 
Bradford Protein Assay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
•  2% (W/V) polyvinylpyrolidon PVP 
▪  2 g in 100 mL 
 
Protein content is determined according to Bradford’s method (Bradford, 1976), which utilises 
bovine serum albumin as standard. Bradford Mix. 
Reagents 
•  Bradford reagent 
Dissolve 100 mg Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 in 50 mL 95% ethanol, add 100 mL 85% (w/v) 
phosphoric acid. Dilute to 1 liter when the dye has completely dissolved, and filter through Whatman 
#1 paper just before use.  
The Bradford reagent should be a light brown in color. Filtration may have to be repeated to remove 
of blue components from the reagent. The Bio-Rad concentrate is expensive, but more sensitive 
than Homemade" reagents.  
•  (Optional) 1 M NaOH (to be used if samples are not readily soluble in the color reagent).  
Dissolve 40 grams of NaOH into a minimun of water to ensure complete solubility (m = 1 * 1 * 40). 
Then add H O until the volume of the solution is 1 L. See also: 
2
 http://www.nuigalway.ie/nanoscale/stars.htmL 
Assay 
•  Warm up the spectrophotometer before use  
•  Aliquot 5 μL of the supernatant into the wells of a microplate 
•  Add  200  μL  Bradford  Mix  (5  x  diluted)  to  the  samples.  Do  this  quickly  and  measure 
immediately 
•  Add 5 mL dye reagent and incubate for 5 min  
•  Measure the absorption at 595 nm and relate to Standard curve prepared with BSA in NaOH 
(0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2 … to 1 mg/mL). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 6 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
6 

   
 
Bradford Protein Assay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Calculation Process 
First from Linear Regression between the Standard Values and the Absorbances: 
 
Y = AX + B and therefore X = (Y-B) / A 
with    Y = Absorbance  
           X = Concentration (mmol/mL) 
           A = Slope 
           B = Intercept  
           R-square = 98-99% 
 
Hence: 
C  (mg/g)= X (mmol/mL) / FW(g)  
final
 
with    FW = Fresh Weight  
Comments 
The dye reagent reacts primarily with arginine residues and less so with histidine, lysine, tyrosine, 
tryptophan, and phenylalanine residues. As expected, the assay is less accurate for basic or acidic 
proteins. The Bradford assay is rather sensitive to bovine serum albumin, more so than "average" 
proteins, by about a factor of two. Immunoglogin G (IgG - gamma globulin) is the preferred protein 
standard. The addition of 1 M NaOH was suggested by Stoscheck (1990) to allow the solubilisation 
of membrane proteins and reduce the protein-to-protein variation in color yield. 
 
Standard curve prepared with BSA in NaOH (0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2 …..to 1 mg/mL). See how to set up an 
assay for suggestions as to preparing the standards. 
 
Stock solution preparation: C = 1 mg/mL (10 mg BSA into 10 mL H O = BSA stock solution). 
2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 7 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
7 

   
 
Bradford Protein Assay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Concentration (1 mL eppi) (μg/mL)  BSA stock solution (μL)  H O (μL) 
2
1,000  1,000  0 
900   900  100 
800   800  200 
700   700  300 
500   500  500 
100   100  900 
50   50  950 
20   20  980 
0  0  1,000 
Additional References 
Bradford, MM. A rapid and sensitive for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing 
the principle of protein-dye binding. Analytical Biochemistry 72: 248-254. 1976.  
Stoscheck, CM. Quantitation of Protein. Methods in Enzymology 182: 50-69 (1990). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 8 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
8 

|     | Concentration (1 mL eppi) (μg/mL)   |    |     | BSA stock solution (μL)   |    |     | H O (μL)   |    |
|     |                                     |    |     |                           |    |     | 2          |    |
|:----|:------------------------------------|:---|:----|:--------------------------|:---|:----|:-----------|:---|
|     | 1,000                               |    |     | 1,000                     |    |     | 0          |    |
| 900 |                                     |    | 900 |                           |    | 100 |            |    |
|     | 800                                 |    |     | 800                       |    |     | 200        |    |
| 700 |                                     |    | 700 |                           |    | 300 |            |    |
|     | 500                                 |    |     | 500                       |    |     | 500        |    |
| 100 |                                     |    | 100 |                           |    | 900 |            |    |
|     | 50                                  |    |     | 50                        |    |     | 950        |    |
| 20  |                                     |    | 20  |                           |    | 980 |            |    |
|     | 0                                   |    |     | 0                         |    |     | 1,000      |    |

   
 
Bradford Protein Assay 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 Linked SOPs 
   
SOP Code  SOP Function 
NA  NA 
 
4 Disclaimer 
 
The information presented here has been thoroughly researched and is believed to be accurate and 
correct.  However, the authors cannot be held legally responsible for any errors. There are no 
warranties, expressed or implied, made with respect to the information provided.  The authors will 
not be liable for any direct, indirect, special, incidental or consequential damages arising out of the 
use or inability to use the content of this publication.  
 
5 Copyright 
 
© All rights reserved.  Reproduction and dissemination of material presented here for research, 
educational or other non-commercial purposes are authorised without any prior written permission 
from the copyright holders provided the source is fully acknowledged.  Reproduction of material for 
sale or other commercial purposes is prohibited. 
 
6 Citation 
 
Please cite this report as follows:  
 
Ntatsi, G., Savvas, D. (2018) Standard Operating Procedure 015: Bradford protein assay. Developed 
by the EU-H2020 project TRUE (‘Transition paths to sustainable legume-based systems in Europe’), 
funded by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation programme under Grant 
Agreement Number 727973. Available online at: www.true-project.eu. 
 
 
This Project has received funding from the European Union´s Horizon 2020  www.true-project.eu 
Page 9 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement No 727973 
 
 
9 

|    | SOP Code   |    |    | SOP Function   |    |
|:---|:-----------|:---|:---|:---------------|:---|
| NA |            |    | NA |                |    |