0102 rpA 41  ]llah-sem.tam-dnoc[  2v7144.7090:viXra
Magnetic Nanoparticle Assemblies
∗
Dimitris Kechrakos
October 31, 2018
Department of Sciences, School of Pedagogical and Technological Education
(ASPETE), Athens 14121, Greece
Abstract
This chapter provides an introduction to the fundamental physical
ideas and models relevant to the phenomenon of magnetic hysteresis in
nanoparticle assemblies. The concepts of single-domain particles and su-
perparamagnetism are discussed. The mechanisms of magnetization by
coherent rotation and the role of temperature in the gradual decay of
magnetization are analyzed in the framework of simple analytical models.
Modern numerical techniques (Monte Carlo simulations, Magnetization
Dynamics) used to study dense nanoparticle assemblies are presented. An
overview of the most common experimental techniques used to measure
the magnetic hysteresis effect in nanoparticle assemblies are presented and
the underlying principles are exposed.
Keywords: magnetic nanoparticles; magnetic anisotropy; dipolar interactions;
magnetic hysteresis; superparamagnetism; mean field theory; Monte Carlo;
magnetization dynamics
∗
Contact author: Tel : +30-210-2896705, Fax : +30-210-2896713, E-mail :
dkehrakos@aspete.gr
1

Contents
1 Introduction 3
2 Isolated magnetic nanoparticles 5
2.1 Single-Domain Particles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.2 Magnetization by Coherent Rotation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.3 Magnetic behavior at finite temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
2.3.1 Superparamagnetism and Blocking temperature . . . . . . 11
2.3.2 Thermal relaxation under an applied field . . . . . . . . . 13
3 Magnetic Measurements 16
3.1 Field-cooled (FC) and Zero-Field-Cooled (ZFC) Magnetization . 17
3.2 Remanent magnetization and Coercive field . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4 Interacting nanoparticle assemblies 19
4.1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
4.2 Mean Field models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
4.3 Numerical Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3.1 The Monte Carlo method . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.3.2 The Magnetization Dynamics method . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3.3 Time scale of numerical methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
4.3.4 MMC study of dipolar interacting assemblies : A case study 25
5 Summary 27
6 Future perspectives 27
2

1 Introduction
Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) are minute parts of magnetic materials with
typical size well below 10−7m. They are present in different materials found
in nature such as rocks, living organisms, ceramics and corrosion products,
but they are also artificially made and used as the active component of fer-
rofluids, permanent magnets, soft magnetic materials, biomedical materials and
catalysts. Their diverse applications in geology, physics chemistry, biology and
medicine renders the study of their properties of great importance both to sci-
ence and technology.
In geology, the nature and origin of magnetic phenomena related to the
presence of magnetite nanoparticles in rocks is of great interest to the palaeo-
magnetist who searches for the geomagnetic record of rocks. The presence of
magnetite particles associated with the trigeminal nerve in pigeons offers a re-
liable explanation to the Earth’s magnetic field detection and the consequent
navigation capability. In fine arts, magnetic analysis of ancient paintings facil-
itates the reconstruction of the production techniques of ancient ceramics. In
living organisms, the role of ferritin, a magnetic nanoparticle per se, is impor-
tant among the iron storage proteins. MNPs are also used as contrast agents
in Magnetic Resonance Imaging. Recent work has involved the development of
bioconjugated MNPs, which facilitated specific targeting of these MRI probes
to brain tumors. MNPs are also used as highly active catalysts which has long
been demonstrated by the the use of finely divided metals in several reactions.
Owing to their high surface-to-volume ratio MNPs of iron are more efficient at
waste remediation than bulk iron.
High density magnetic data storage media provide a major technological
driving force for further exploration of MNPs. It is expected that if MNPs
with diameter 5nm can be used as individually addressed magnetic bits, mag-
netic data storage densities of 1Tbit/in2 would be achieved, namely an order
of magnitude higher than the present record (Moser 2002). MNPs have also
been demonstrated to be functional elements in magneto-optical switches, sen-
sors based on Giant Magneto-Resistance and magnetically controllable Single
Electron Transistor devices.
The most common preparation methods for MNPs produce assemblies with
different structural and compositional characteristics that depend on the par-
ticular method adopted. Granular films, ferrofluids and cluster-assembled films
are characterized as assemblies with random order in MNP locations, while or-
dered arrays are found in patterned media (known also as magnetic dots) and
self-assembled films. The MNP preparation methods are divided to top-down
and bottom-up. In top-down methods , the NPs are formed from a larger sys-
tem by appropriate physical processing, such as thermal treatment, etching,
etc. In bottom-up methods, the NPs are formed by an atomic nucleation pro-
cess that takes place either in ultrahigh vacuum or in a liquid environment.
The latter method relies on colloidal chemistry techniques and presently ap-
pears to be the most promising method for production of nanoparticles with
extremely narrow size distribution. Colloidal synthesis methods combined with
3

self-assembly methods produce MNP samples with both size uniformity and long
range structural order. It is worth noticing that structural order in a MNP as-
sembly is a decisive property for production of ultrahigh density storage media.
Owing to their attractive features and their low cost, colloidal synthesis meth-
ods and self-assembly attract presently intense research activity in the field of
MNP preparation (Petit 1998, Murray 2001, Willard 2004, Farrell 2005, Darling
2005).
The magnetic properties of MNPs and their assemblies provide a fascinating
field for basic research, which is done on two different scales, the atomic and
the mesoscopic. In the atomic scale, the properties of individual MNPs are
examined and they are revealed in samples with low particle concentration.
In the mesoscopic scale, dense samples are examined which exhibit collective
magnetic behavior arising from interparticle interactions. The study of the
magnetic properties can be naturally divided in the investigation of the ground
state configuration (long range order, disorder, etc) and the excitations from it.
Excitations can be either weak, as for example at low temperature and weak
external magnetic field, or strong, as for example, close to a thermal phase
transition or under a reversing magnetic field.
For individual MNPs the ground state configuration can differ remarkably
from the parent bulk material in various ways. For example, owing to energy
balance reasons, the abundance of magnetic domains that form in a bulk magnet
can be replaced by a single domain in a MNP, which then becomes magnetically
saturated even in the absence of an external magnetic field (N´eel 1949). The
application of an external field forces the atomic magnetic moments of a single-
domain MNP to rotate coherently (Stoner 1948). Also, for temperature above a
threshold, the direction of particle’s magnetization fluctuates at random, making
the particle bahave as a molecule with a giant magnetic moment. The appli-
cations of this effect, known as superparamagnetism (Bean 1959), are presently
a lot, ranging from geology to medicine. Finally, we should remark that the
above described simplified picture of a single-domain MNP becomes invalid if
one considers the crucial effect of the MNP surface. Reduced crystal symmetry
and chemical disorder close to the surface can produce variations between the
surface and interior magnetic structure and modify the overall response of the
MNP to an applied field (Kodama 1999).
When MNPs form dense assemblies, interparticle interactions produce a col-
lective behavior, by coupling the magnetic moments of individual MNPs. This
fact renders in most cases even the determination of the ground state configura-
tion an intricate physical problem. The collective behavior of dense (interacting)
assemblies is reflected also on the modified magnetic response of the assembly,
compared to isolated MNPs. The most complex behavior occurs in samples
with random morphology and long-range magnetostatic interactions. Various
experimental measurements have been proposed to reveal the nature of the in-
terparticle interactions, and various measuring protocols probe different aspects
of the collective behavior. On the other hand, analytical models have difficul-
ties in predicting or explaining the magnetic behavior of these interacting MNP
assemblies, and most of the curret research relies on numerical simulations.
4

In this chapter we provide an introduction to the fundamental ideas and
concepts pertaining to the magnetic properties of MNP assemblies. Emphasis
is given to the response of MNP assemblies to an applied magnetic field and the
related issue of magnetization reversal. The chapter is organized as follows :
In Section 2 we discuss the magnetic properties of individual (isolated) MNPs.
Fist, the condition under which a single-domain MNP is formed is derived, and
then the magnetic response under an applied field is examined. The presentation
is based on a simple theoretical model (N´eel 1949, Stoner 1948). In Section 3 we
give a brief overview of the most common magnetic characterization techniques
and explain the information extracted from each one. In Section 4 we discuss the
response of a dense MNP assembly to a magnetic field, when the interparticle
interactions are important and lead to a collective behavior of the MNPs. Mean-
field models are presented and an introduction to modern numerical techniques
(Monte Carlo, Magnetization dynamics) to tackle this problem are presented.
The chapter is summarized in Section 5 and the perspectives in this field are
presented in Sections 6.
2 Isolated magnetic nanoparticles
In this section we derive the criterion for formation of single-domain MNPs and
examine the magnetization process at zero temperature by coherent rotation of
magnetization (Stoner-Wohlfarth model). The behavior of a MNP assembly at
finite temperature is discussed and the related concepts of superparamagnetism
and blocking temperature are introduced. The effects of an applied dc magnetic
field is examined within the simplest model assuming uniaxial anisotropy and
bistability of particle moments (N´eel model).
2.1 Single-Domain Particles
The ground state magnetic structure of a ferromagnetic (FM) material is the
outcome of the balance between three different types of energies, namely, the
exchange (U ), the magnetostatic (U ) and the anisotropy energy (U ). The
ex m a
exchange interaction has its origin in the Pauli exclusion principle for electrons.
Let the FM material be divided in small cubic elements each one carrying a
magnetic moment µ . The exchange interaction between the cubic elements
−→i
favors parallel alignment of neighboring magnetic moments and it is written in
the usual Heisenberg form as U = (A/a2) cosθ , where A is the stiffness
ex − ij ij
constant, a is the lattice constant and θ is the angle between moments at sites
ij
P
i and j. The stiffness constant is related to the microscopic exchange energy J
through the relation A = zJS2/a, where S is the atomic spin and z = 1,2,4
for sc, fcc and bcc lattice, respectively. The magnetostatic energy, is the sum of
Coulomb energies between the magnetic moments comprising the FM material.
It can be expressed as U = µ −H→ −M→/2, where H is the demagnetizing
m 0 d d
− ·
field and M the sample magnetization. The anisotropy energy, is the energy
required to orient the magnetization at an angle (θ) relative to certain fixed axes
5

of the system, known as the easy axes. The microscopic mechanisms leading
to anisotropy can be quite diverse and the most common types of anisotropy
found in FMs are as follows:
(i) Crystal anisotropy. It arises from the combined effects of spin-orbit cou-
pling and quenching of the orbital momentum that produce a preferred
orientation of the magnetization along a symmetry axes of the underly-
ing crystal. For a uniaxial materials (e.g. hexagonal Co) it has the form
U = K sin2θ + K sin4θ + ..., where K ,K ,... are the anisotropy con-
a 1 2 1 2
stants, and θ the angle between the magnetization direction and the easy
axis. Typical values for cobalt are K = 4.5 106 J/m3 and K =
1 2
×
1.5 105 J/m3. For cubic crystals (e.g. fcc Fe, Ni) it reads U =
a
×
K (a2a2 + a2a2 + a2a2) + K a2a2a2 + ..., where a ,a ,a are the direc-
1 1 2 2 3 3 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 3
tion cosines of the magnetization direction. Typical values for Fe are
K = 4.8 104 J/m3 and K = 0.5 104 J/m3.
1 2
× ± ×
(ii) Stress anisotropy. It is produced by the presence of stress in the sample
and it has a uniaxial character U = K sin2θ, where K = 3λ σ, with λ
a σ σ i i
2
the magnetically induced isotropic strain and σ the stress.
(iii) Surface anisotropy. This is caused by the presence of sample free bound-
aries, where the reduced symmetry and the presence of defects can induce
additional anisotropy. It is important in MNPs because of the substantial
surface-to-volume ratio.
(iv) Shape anisotropy. This occurs because on one hand the demagnetizing
field depends on the shape of the magnetized body and takes the low-
est value along the longest axis of the sample, and on the other hand,
U is minimized when M is parallel to H . As an example, consider a
m d
specimen in the shape of prolate spheroid with major axis c and minor
axis a, magnetized at an angle θ with respect to c-axis. Then, U =
m
µ0 N (M cosθ)2 + N (M sinθ)2 = 1(N N )M2 sin2 θ , where N and
c a c a c
2 2 −
N are the demagnetizing factors along the corresponding axes. This ex-
a
(cid:2) (cid:3)
pression for U has the form of uniaxial anisotropy with K = 1(N
m s c
2 −
N )M2. Typical cases, are a spherical specimen with K = 0, an infinitely
a s
thin planar specimen with N = 0 (in-plane) and N = 1, and a infinitely
k ⊥
long (needle-shaped) specimen with N = 1 (along the axis) and N = 0.
k 2 ⊥
In studies of the magnetic properties of MNPs, it is a common practice, to
describe, within the simplest approximation, the overall effect of the various
anisotropy types by an effective uniaxial anisotropy term U = K sin2 θ.
a eff
The constant K accounts for the total effect of crystalline, surface and shape
eff
anisotropy.
A bulk FM material is composed of many uniformly magnetized regions
(domains). The direction of magnetization in different domains varies, and in
a bulk sample it is randomly distributed leading to a non-magnetized sample
even at temperatures far below the Curie point. The formation of magnetic
domains in FM materials results from the competition between the exchange and
6

Figure 1: One-dimensional model of a FM. (a) Long-range order. (b) An in-
finitely thin DW (dashed line). The increase of exchange energy at the wall is
higher than the decrease of the magnetostatic energy. (c) A 1800 domain wall
spread over N = 10 sites. The gradual rotation of atomic moments produces a
state with lower total energy compared to (b).
the magnetostatic energy. The former favors perfect alignment of neighboring
moments and the latter is reduced by breaking a uniformly magnetized body
into as many as possible regions with opposite magnetization directions. The
outcome of this competition is the formation of a certain number of domains
in a sample with a particular orientation of the magnetization directions. A
typical domain size in a bulk ferromagnet is 1µm.
Neighboring magnetic domains are separated by a region where the lo-
cal magnetization changes gradually direction between the two opposite sides,
known as domain wall (DW). Domain walls have finite width (δ ) determined
w
by the balance between the exchange and anisotropy energy. As an example,
consider an one-dimensional model of a DW in a uniaxial material, where a 1800
rotation of magnetization is distributed over N sites, as shown in Fig. 1. The
total energy per unit area reads
σ(N) = σ + σ = JS2(π/N)2(N/a2) + NaK . (1)
ex a 1
Minimization with respect to N leads to
δ = Na = π(A/K )1/2. (2)
w 1
For a typical exchange stiffness value (A 10−11 J/m), Eq.(2) predicts for iron
≈
δ 0.4 µm while for a magnetically harder material like cobalt, δ 60 nm.
w w
≈ ≈
Substituting the result of Eq.(2) into in Eq.(1) provides the areal energy density
of the DW
σ = 2π(AK )1/2 (3)
w 1
7

Consider a finite sample of a FM material, with size d. As the size of the
sample is reduced, the number of DWs it contains decreases, because fewer
regions with opposite directions of magnetization are required to reduce the
magnetostatic energy. Below a critical value of the system size, the sample does
not contain any DW and it is in a single domain (SD) state exhibiting satu-
ration magnetization (M ). For a spherical particle, the critical diameter (d )
s c
can be estimated as follows: the SD state is stable when the energy needed to
create a DW that spans the whole particle, U = σ πr2, is greater than the
w w
magnetostatic energy gain from the reduction to a multidomain state, which is
approximately equal to the magnetostatic energy stored in a uniformly mag-
netized sphere, U = 1µ M2V , with M the saturation magnetization and
m 3 0 s s
V = 4πr3. The condition U = U provides
w m
3
(AK )1/2
1
r = 9 (4)
c
µ M2
0 s
For Fe, this approximation gives r 3 nm, which is by far too small. The rea-
c
≈
son is that the DW is assumed to have the same one-dimensional structure as in
the bulk material. An improved calculation that considers a three-dimensional
confinement of the DW provides for the critical radius:
9A 2r
c
r = ln 1 (5)
c
sµ 0M s2 a −
(cid:20) (cid:18) (cid:19) (cid:21)
In the case of Fe, numerical solution of Eq.(5) gives r 25 nm, which is
c
≈
very close to more accurate micromagnetic calculations and the experimentally
obtained value (Cullity 1972).
2.2 Magnetization by Coherent Rotation
The magnetization (M) of a bulk FM crystal that contains many magnetic do-
mains, changes under application of an external magnetic field (H), a process
known as technical magnetization. However, the value of M is not a unique
function of H and the state of the sample prior to application of the field is
important. This is the phenomenon of magnetic hysteresis, which is commonly
depicted by drawing the M H dependence under a cyclic variation of the field
−
from a positive to a negative and back to a positive saturation value (hysteresis
loop). Two important characteristic values of a hysteresis loop are the rema-
nence (M ), namely the magnetization after removal of the saturating field, and
r
the coercivity (H ), namely the field required for the magnetization to vanish.
c
In a bulk FM crystal, the magnetization proceeds by two basic mechanisms,
namely domain wall motion (weak fields) and rotation of magnetization (strong
fields).
In MNPs, the change of magnetization under an applied field proceeds only
by rotation, because formation of DWs is energetically unfavorable. During the
magnetization rotation the atomic moments of the MNP remain parallel to each
8

other and the MNP behaves as a giant molecule carrying a magnetic moment
of a few thousand Bohr magnetons (µ 104µ for a 5 nm diameter Fe MNP).
B
∼
This process of magnetization is known as coherent rotation or Stoner-Wohlfarth
(SW) model, after the authors who introduced and solved it (Stoner 1948). We
discuss it briefly next. Consider a MNP with uniaxial (effective) anisotropy K
1
along an easy axis taken to be the z-axis (Fig. 2). For an applied field that
makes an angle θ with the easy axis, we wish to determine the equilibrium
0
position of the magnetic moment µ = M V . Let µ make an angle θ with the
s −→
easy axis, then the total energy density reads
u = K cos2(θ θ ) µ HM cosθ (6)
1 0 0 s
− − −
The equilibrium condition (zero-torque) is
du
= 0 2K sin(θ θ )cos(θ θ ) + µ HM sinθ = 0 (7)
1 0 0 0 s
dθ ⇒ − −
and introducing the dimensionless quantity h = H/H with the anisotropy field
a
H = 2K /µ M , Eq.(7) becomes
a 1 0 s
sin(2(θ θ )) + 2hsinθ = 0. (8)
0
−
We define the reduced magnetization along the field m = µcosθ/M V = cosθ
s
and the solution of Eq.(8) is written as
2m(1 m2)1/2 cos2θ + sin2θ (1 2m2) + 2h(1 m2)1/2 = 0 (9)
0 0
− − −
The remanence (h = 0) and coercivity (m = 0) are readily obtained from Eq.(9)
as
m = cosθ and h = sinθ cosθ . (10)
r 0 c 0 0
For non-zero field values, Eq.(9) is solved for h as a function of m and the data
are shown in Fig. 2. Consider the two extreme cases, namely for θ = 900
0
(hard-axis magnetization) and θ = 00 (easy-axis magnetization). In the former
0
case, the magnetization shows zero coercivity and a linear field dependence.
In the latter case, the magnetization remains constant until the reversing field
becomes equal to the anisotropy field, and then an irreversible jump of the
reduced magnetization from m = +1 to m = 1 is seen. These extreme cases
−
demonstrate the distinct mechanism of switching by rotation that can occur in
an assembly. More generally, at an arbitrary field angle, an irreversible jump
of the magnetization occurs at the so called switching field (H ) defined as the
s
field value satisfying dm/dh . At H = H the local minimum of the total
s
→ ∞
energy, corresponding to the higher energy state (magnetization opposite to the
applied field) disappears and the system jumps to the remaining minimum that
corresponds to a magnetization direction along the field (see Fig. 3). In other
words, H is an instability point of the total energy and it satisfies du/dθ = 0
s
and d2u/dθ2 = 0. In the SW model, the stability condition reads
d2u
= 0 cos2(θ θ ) hsinθ = 0 (11)
0
dθ2 ⇒ − ±
9

 
(a)                                (b)
1.0 0
0
+z M 0
S S 0.8 30
M/M
H
0.6
o 0
80
0.4 0
60
0
90
0.2
0.0
-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
H/H
a
Figure 2: (a) Sketch of a magnetic nanoparticle with uniaxial anisotropy along
the z-axis and an applied field at an angle (θ ) with respect to the easy axis.
0
(b) Magnetization curves within the Stoner-Wohlfarth model for various field
directions. The initial direction of the magnetization is taken along the field.
From Eqs.(8) and (11) we obtain for the switching field h = H /H
s s a
h = (cos2/3 θ + sin2/3 θ )−3/2 (12)
s 0 0
By comparison of Eqs.(10) and (12) one finds that h < h for 450 < θ < 900 ,
c s 0
namely switching happens after the magnetization changes sign, while for field
angles close to the easy axis, 00 < θ < 450, the magnetization changes sign
0
by an irreversible jump (h = h ). The physical distinction between h and
c s s
h can be understood by the following example. Consider a SW particle under
c
application of a reversing field h = h , which brings the particle’s moment µ in
c −→
a direction perpendicular to the field, so that m = 0. Then the field is switched
off adiabatically. If h < h (i.e. 450 < θ < 900), µ will return back to the
c s 0 −→
positive remanence value (m = +1), while if h = h (i.e. 00 < θ < 450),
c s 0
µ will jump to the negative remanence state (m = 1). The switching field
−→
−
of a hard (i.e. large anisotropy) magnetic material is a physical quantity with
great technological interest in magnetic recording applications. In these, the
information bit is stored in the direction of magnetization and the switching
field is the field required to write or erase this information.
Stoner and Wohlfarth (Stoner 1948) also studied an assembly of isolated
MNPs with easy axes directions distributed uniformly on a sphere (random
anisotropy model, RIM). The reported values for the remanence and coercivity
are
m = 0.5 and h = 0.48. (13)
r c
This result is particularly useful as random easy axis distribution is found
10

|    |    |    |   None |    |    |    |    |
|:---|:---|:---|-------:|:---|:---|:---|:---|
|    |    |    |      0 |    |    |    |    |
|    |    | 30 |        |    |    |    |    |
|    |    | 0  |        |    |    |    |    |
|    |    |    |        | 0  |    |    |    |
|    |    |    |        | 80 |    |    |    |
|    |    | 60 |        | 0  |    |    |    |
|    |    |    |        | 90 |    |    |    |

2
=0
o
)VK / U( ygrenE decudeR 1
1 
0
0.0
-1
0.2
0.5
-2
1.0
-3
1.5
-4
0.0 0.5 1.0
 /  (rad)
Figure 3: Dependence of total energy on the direction of the particle’s moment
(see Eq.(6)), for various strengths of the applied field (h = H/H ). The energy
a
minimum at θ = π becomes unstable at the switching field h = 1.
s
in most MNP-based materials (granular films, cluster-assembled films, self-
assembled arrays, etc)
As a final remark, we remind that in the SW model thermal effects are
ignored (T = 0), thus energy-minimization with respect to the magnetic moment
direction is a sufficient condition to determine the field-dependent magnetization
at equilibrium. The magnetic behavior of SD particles at finite temperature is
discussed in the following section.
2.3 Magnetic behavior at finite temperature
How do thermal fluctuations affect the average magnetization direction of an
isolated MNP ? How does the presence of an applied field modify the magnetic
response at finite temperature ? Is the assembly magnetization stable in time,
when the MNP moment are subject to thermal fluctuations ? These points are
briefly discussed next, along the lines of a model first studied by N´eel (N´eel
1949).
2.3.1 Superparamagnetism and Blocking temperature
Consider an assembly of identical SD particles with uniaxial anisotropy. The en-
ergy (per particle) is U = K V cos2 θ, where θ is the angle between the single
1
−
particle magnetic moment µ and the easy axis. The energy barrier that must be
−→
overcome for a MNP to rotate its magnetization is E = K V . As first pointed
b 1
out by N´eel (N´eel 1949), thermal fluctuations could provide the required energy
to overcome the anisotropy barrier and spontaneously (i.e. without externally
11

|    |     |    |    |
|:---|:----|:---|:---|
|    | =   | 0  |    |
|    | o   |    |    |
|    | 0.0 |    |    |
|    | 0.2 |    |    |
|    | 0.5 |    |    |
|    | 1.0 |    |    |
|    | 1.5 |    |    |

applied field) reverse the magnetization of a MNP from one easy direction to the
other. This phenomenon can be thought of as a Brownian motion of a particle’s
magnetic moment. The assembly shows paramagnetic behavior, however it is
the giant moments of the MNPs that fluctuate rather than the atomic moments
of a classical bulk paramagnetic material. This magnetic behavior of the MNPs
is called superparamagnetism (SPM) (Bean 1959) At high enough temperature,
k T >> K V , the anisotropy energy can be neglected and the assembly magne-
B 1
tization can be described by the well known Langevin function M = nM L  (x),
s
where n is the particle number density, and x = µ µH/k T. Thus, the features
0 B
serving as signature of superparamagnetism are the scaling of magnetization
curves with H/T, as dictated by the Langevin function, and the lack of hys-
teresis, i.e. vanishing remanence and coercivity. Moreover, the major difference
between classical paramagnetism of bulk materials and SPM is the weak fields
(H 0.1 T) required to achieve saturation of a MNP assembly magnetization
∼
M. This occurs because of the large particle moment (µ 104µ ) compared
B
∼
to the atomic moments (µ µ ).
at B
∼
Measurement of magnetization curves at sufficiently high temperature can,
in principle, be used to extract the particle moment µ. In practice, two compli-
cation arise. First, the presence of different particle sizes in any sample produces
a convolution of the Langevin function with the volume distribution function.
Second, interparticle interactions, modify the reversal mechanism and the SW
model needs extensions, which are discussed in the Section 4.
At low temperature, k T << K V , the anisotropy barriers are very rarely
B 1
overcome (weak thermal fluctuations), the assembly shows hysteresis and this
is called the blocked state.
One might now ask, whether there exists a temperature value that draws the
border between the blocked and the SPM state. Following N´eel’s arguments,
we assume that thermal activation over the anisotropy barrier can be described
within the relaxation time approximation (or Arrhenius law) as
τ = τ exp(K V/k T), (14)
0 1 B
where 1/2τ is the probability per unit time for a reversal of µ. The intrinsic
−→
time τ depends on the material parameters (magnetostriction constant, Young
0
modulus, anisotropy constant and saturation magnetization). Typical values
are τ 10−10 10−9s as obtained by N´eel. To detect the superparamagnetic
0
∼ −
behavior experimentally, the MNP must be probed for a long enough period of
time to perform many switching events that would produce a vanishing small
time-average magnetic moment. If τ is the measuring time-window, the con-
m
dition for SPM behavior is τ τ. The strong (exponential) dependence of τ
m
≫
on temperature (see Eq.(14)) permits us to define a temperature value (or more
precisely, a very narrow temperature range) above which the relaxation time is
so small that SPM behavior is observed. This is called the blocking temperature
(T ) of the assembly, and is given by
b
T = K V/k ln(τ /τ). (15)
b 1 B m
12

For T < T , the particle moments fluctuate without switching direction (on av-
b
erage) and the assembly is in the blocked state exhibiting hysteresis. For T > T
b
the assembly is in the SPM state, hysteresis disappears and thermal equilibrium
is established. It is remarkable, that the value of T depends on τ , which is a
b m
characteristic of the experimental technique adopted. For example, in dc sus-
ceptibility measurements τ 100s, in ac susceptibility τ 10−8 104s,
m m
≈ ≈ −
in Mo¨ssbauer spectroscopy τ 10−9 10−7s and in neutron spectroscopy
m
≈ −
τ 10−12 10−8s. Therefore, if T is of interest for a particular application,
m b
≈ −
the measurement technique implemented must imitate the real conditions. For
example, to study the reliability of magnetic storage media, dc magnetic mea-
surements over a wide time window (τ 102 104 s) should be used, while
m
∼ −
to study magnetic recording speed, ac measurements are appropriate.
Brown (Brown 1963) extended the treatment of thermal activation over the
anisotropy barrier, allowing also for fluctuations of µ transverse to the easy axis,
which N´eel has neglected, and obtained a different expression for τ . However,
0
the common feature of both studies is the temperature and volume dependence
of τ, so the final result, Eq.(14), is referred to as the N´eel-Brown model.
In a polydisperse assembly, the distribution of particle volumes f(V ), pro-
duces a corresponding distribution of blocking temperatures f(T ). Then, at
b
a certain temperature T the assembly contains a mixture of blocked and SPM
particles. The MNPs with volumes above a critical value V , fulfill the require-
c
ment of strong thermal energy with respect to their anisotropy barrier, and are
SPM, while those while those with V V are blocked. From Eq.(14), the
c
≤
critical volume reads V = k T ln(τ /τ )/K . As explained above for T , also
c b m 0 1 b
for V the experimental determination depends on the technique adopted. Most
c
preparation techniques result in polydisperse samples and the problem of ex-
tracting the size distribution function from magnetic measurements, pioneered
by Bean and Jacobs more than fifty years ago (Bean 1956) remains a difficult
task mainly due to the complications introduced by interparticle interactions.
Knobel and colleagues have recently reviewed this subject (Knobel 2008).
2.3.2 Thermal relaxation under an applied field
Consider an assembly of N identical MNPs with uniaxial anisotropy along
the z-axis and let their moments point initially along the +z-axis. Assume
that a magnetic field H, weaker than the switching field , which is equal to
H , is applied along the z-axis. Then, the total energy per particle reads,
a
−
U = K V cos2(θ θ ) + µ HM V cosθ. It exhibits two non-equivalent local
1 0 0 s
− −
minima at θ = 0,π with values U = K V M V H and a maximum at
± 1 s
− ±
θ = π/2 with U = K V (H/H )2, as shown in Fig. 4. The energy barriers
max 1 a
and the corresponding relaxation times for the forward (+) and the backward
( ) rotations are
−
E± (H) = K V (1 H/H )2 and τ = τ exp(E± /k T). (16)
b 1 ∓ a ± 0 b B
The change of τ due to the field is much weaker than the change of the expo-
0
nential factor and as such it is neglected in the above equation.
13

U
U
max
 + +
E
b
-
 -
E
U b
+
K V
1
U
-
0                                
Figure 4: Total energy of an isolated part icle with uniaxial anisotropy subject to
a negative field parallel to the easy axis with value less than the switching field
(0 < H < H ). Energy barriers (E ) and relaxation times (τ) for the forward
s b
(+) and the backward ( ) process are not equal.
−
The blocking temperature, as measured within a time-window τ , is reached
m
when the observation time equals the forward relaxation time τ , because the
+
latter corresponds to a moment flip from the initial state along +z to the op-
posite direction, namely a process that reduces the initial magnetization. From
Eq.(16) one obtains
K V (1 H/H )2
T (H) = 1 − a T (0)(1 H/H )2. (17)
b b a
k ln(τ /τ) ≡ −
B m
which indicates that the blocking temperature is reduced by the presence of
a reverse field. By completely symmetric arguments one could show that T
b
increases in the presence of a field with the same direction as the initial magne-
tization.
Since thermal fluctuations act in synergy to a reverse field in switching the
moment of a MNP, it is expected that the coercivity of an assembly will decay
with temperature. As discussed above, for a particle with its moment along
the +z-axis, a reverse field (0 < H < H ) reduces the barrier for reversal to
a
+
the value E given in Eq.(16). If the field is strong enough, it will reduce
b
the barrier to the value appropriate for superparamagnetic relaxation, namely
k T ln(τ /τ ), and the (time-average) magnetization will vanish. On the other
B m 0
hand, the reverse field that makes the magnetization vanish is by definition the
coercive field. Therefore, the following relation holds
K V (1 H /H )2 = k T ln(τ /τ ) (18)
1 c a B m 0
−
which, using Eq.(15), provides the temperature dependent coercivity
H (T) = H 1 (T/T )1/2 . (19)
c a b
−
h i
14

| None   | Umax   |    |
|        | + +    |    |
|        | Eb     |    |
|        | -      |    |
|        | -      |    |
|        | Eb     |    |
|:-------|:-------|:---|
| U      |        |    |

The microscopic mechanism of thermal activation of the MNP moment
over the anisotropy barrier, produces a macroscopically measured time-decay
of the magnetization. We derive this dependence assuming that when a mo-
ment switches direction it continues to remain along the easy axis (N´eel 1949).
Then, at time t, N particles occupy the lower minimum at θ = 0, and the
+
rest N = N N particles occupy the higher minimum at θ = π. The time-
− +
−
evolution of N is governed by the rate equation
+
dN N N
+ + −
= + . (20)
dt − τ τ
+ −
The magnetization per particle is given as M(t) (2N (t)/N 1)M , and
+ s
≡ −
solution of Eq.(20) provides
M(t) = M + (M M )exp( t/τ) (21)
∞ 0 ∞
− −
with 1/τ = 1/τ + 1/τ being the reduced relaxation time and
+ −
τ τ 2N (0)
+ +
M = − M and M = 1 M (22)
∞ s 0 s
τ + τ N (0) −
+ − −
(cid:18) (cid:19)
the time-asymptote and initial values of the particle magnetization, respectively.
Eq.(21) indicates that the magnetization decays exponentially towards the equi-
librium value M , reached as t . In other words, equilibrium is reached
∞
→ ∞
when the population of the energy minima is proportional to the corresponding
relaxation times (N /N = τ /τ ), as dictated by Eq.(20). When the applied
+ − + −
field is strong enough (H > H ) to produce only one minimum, thermal equilib-
s
rium is always reached. Obviously, in the absence of an external field, thermal
equilibrium is reached when the two equivalent minima are equally populated
(N = N ), resulting in a vanishing magnetization.
+ −
Notice that in Eq.(20) we assumed bistability of the moment direction, which
is a valid approximation provided the anisotropy barrier is high (K V k T).
1 B
≫
For lower anisotropy barriers or elevated temperature (K V k T), the trans-
1 B
≈
verse fluctuations of µ, or, in other words, intra-valley motion around the
−→
energy minimum should be taken into account. A general treatment of thermal
relaxation of SD MNPs was pioneered by Brown (Brown 1963) and extended
to the case of an applied external field (Aharoni 1965, Coffey 1998, Garannin
1999).
If an assembly is polydisperse, characterized by a volume distribution f(V ),
a distribution of blocking temperatures f(T ) exists. However, it remains still
b
unclear if the mean value < T > is the appropriate blocking temperature of
b
the assembly, which should be substituted, for example, in Eq.(19). This point
is discussed further in the literature (Nunes et al 2004).
In a polydisperse assembly, a distribution of relaxation times f(τ) exists,
with f(τ)d(lnτ) the probability of a MNP to have lnτ in the range (lnτ, lnτ + dlnτ)
∞
and the normalization condition f(τ)d(lnτ) = 1. In this case the magneti-
0
zation can be obtained by a superposition of the single-particle magnetization
R
15

properly weighted, as follows
∞
f(τ)
M(t) = M [1 exp( t/τ)] dτ, (23)
s
− − τ
0
Z
where the term in brackets is the probability per unit time for a particle not to
flip its moment. For a broad enough distribution, the observation time t will
satisfy τ t τ , where τ and τ are the minimum and maximum relaxation
1 2 1 2
≪ ≪
times of the assembly, respectively. Assuming a uniform distribution f(τ), it
can be shown that the magnetization exhibits a logarithmic relaxation
M(H,t) = M(H,0) S(H,T)ln(t/τ ) (24)
0
−
with S the magnetic viscosity of the system. Thus, polydispersity produces a
much slower decay of magnetization with time.
The discussion so far, refers to a field applied parallel to the easy axis.
However, random anisotropy is most commonly found in MNP assemblies and
the the necessity to study the effect of a tilted field with respect to the easy axis,
arises. In this case, the calculation of the energy barriers and relaxation time
is a much more complicated task and no analytical solution exists. Numerical
studies (Pfeiffer 1990) showed that the energy barrier for an applied field at an
angle θ to the easy axis can be approximately written as
0
E (θ ) = K V (1 H/H )0.86+1.14h s (25)
b 0 1 a
−
where h is given by Eq.(12). In the limit of θ = 0, Eq.(25) reduces to Eq.(16).
s 0
The temperature dependence of the coercivity for a monodisperse assembly
with random anisotropy has also been obtained numerically (Pfeiffer 1990) as
H (T) = 0.48H 1 (T/T )0.77 , (26)
c a b
−
(cid:2) (cid:3)
which at T = 0 reduces to the SW result of Eq.(13). A detailed theoretical
study of the relaxation time for a non-uniaxial applied field can be found in the
review by Coffey and colleagues (Coffey 1993).
As a concluding remark, the presence of polydispersity and random anisotropy
makes the description of the magnetic behavior of an assembly intractable to
exact analytical treatment. Instead, numerical approximations and simulation
methods provide the alternative theoretical tools to study these systems. Nu-
merical simulation approaches are introduced in Section 4.
3 Magnetic Measurements
Thermal relaxation has a dynamic character, therefore, the relation between the
various relaxation times of the assembly and the measurement time is a decisive
parameter for the outcome of a measurement. Additionally, if the assembly
is not at equilibrium during the measurement, or if it changes its equilibrium
state (for example, by adiabatic changes of the applied field) the result of the
16

measurements depends on the measurement protocol followed. In what follows
we discuss two very common types of static measurements, that reveal the
temperature and field dependence of the magnetization and provide evidence
for superparamagnetic relaxation. Dynamic measurements are not discussed
in this article. The interested reader can find more on the physical principles
behind the most common magnetic measurement techniques in the review of
Dormann and colleagues (Dormann 1997).
3.1 Field-cooled (FC) and Zero-Field-Cooled (ZFC) Mag-
netization
This is a measurement protocol adopted for investigation of the temperature
dependent magnetization of an assembly and it reveals superparamagnetic be-
havior. It is performed in three stages. In the first, the sample is initially at
a high enough temperature (T ) to ensure a SPM state and it is cooled to
max
low temperature (T ) to approach its ground state. In the second stage, a
min
weak field is applied (H H ), the sample is heated up to T and the
sat max
≪
magnetization is measured as a function of temperature. This is the ZFC curve.
In the third stage, the system is cooled down to T , without removing the
min
field, while the magnetization is recorded again, producing the FC curve. Dur-
ing cooling and heating the temperature changes at the same constant rate. A
typical ZFC-FC curve is shown in Fig. 5. As the temperature rises, the blocked
magnetic moments align easier along the applied field leading to an initial in-
crease of the ZFC curve. However, as soon as thermal fluctuations push the
moments over the anisotropy barrier, thermal randomization of the moments
produces a drop of the curve. Therefore, the peak of ZFC curve corresponds to
the blocking temperature of the assembly. Notice that above T the ZFC and
b
FC curves coincide, because the system is in thermal equilibrium and the the
heating (cooling) process is reversible. On cooling below T the moments re-
b
main partially aligned along the field, and the magnetization tends to a non-zero
value. The magnetization vanishes at the ground state (T ) if the measuring
min
field is very weak, a random distribution of the easy axes exists and the as-
sembly is non-interacting (dilute). Deviations from any of the above conditions
produce a non-zero value for M (T = 0). For isolated MNPs, the ZFC-FC
ZFC
curves are only weakly sensitive to the value of the applied field, provided that
it is weak (H H ).
s
≪
3.2 Remanent magnetization and Coercive field
Remanent magnetization at a certain field, M (H), is measured after switching
r
off the previously applied field H. In an assembly of MNPs, remanence arises
because the moments of some particles, which have rotated under an applied
field and to do so they have overcome an energy barrier, cannot rotate back to
their original direction after removal of the field. In a polydisperse assembly,
at finite temperature T, only the blocked MNPs, namely those with T < T
b
∞
contribute to the remanence. Therefore, M /M = f(E )dE where E =
r s b b b,c
E
b,c
R
17

 
0.6
0.4
(a) (b)
)M / M( noitazitengaM
S 
0.3
0.4
s 
M / M  500 G
0.2  
0.2
0.1
100 G
T
b
0.0 0.0
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 50 100 150
  0
 Temperature (k BT/K 1V )  T ( K)
Figure 5: (a) Typical FC-ZFC magnetization curves. The curves join at the
peak of the ZFC which corresponds to T . Arrows indicate the direction the
b
measurements are taken. For T > T the system is in thermal equilibrium
b
and the heating process is reversible. (b) FC-ZFC curves for a dilute (non-
interacting) assembly of Fe nanoparticles (D = 3.0 nm,M = 1720 emu/cc
s
and K = 2.4 105 erg/cc). The blocking temperature (dotted line) decreases
1
×
weakly with increasing measuring field. The non-zero values of M (T = 0)
ZFC
are due to the finite value of the measuring field. Data produced by Monte
Carlo simulations (Section 4.3)
K V is the critical barrier for SPM relaxation at temperature T. Taking into
1 c
account that T V (see Eq.(15)), we deduce that
b
∼
dM (T)/dT = f(T ) (27)
r b
namely, the slope of M (T) provides the barrier (or blocking temperature) dis-
r
tribution function of the assembly. There are three different measurement proto-
cols for the remanent magnetization, as first suggested by Wohlfarth (Wohlfarth
1958) :
(i) Thermoremanence TRM(H,T), measured at the end of a FC process with
field H from T down to the measuring temperature T.
max
(ii) Isothermal Remanence IRM(H,T), measured at the end of ZFC process
from T down to the measuring temperature T, at which a field H is
max
applied and then removed.
(iii) DC Demagnetization remanence DcD(H,T). First, a ZFC process from
T down to the measuring temperature T is performed. Second, the
max
sample is brought to saturation remanence IRM( ,T). Third, a reverse
∞
field H is applied and then removed to leave the sample at the DcD(H,T)
remanence.
18

Wohlfarth pointed out that for isolated MNPs the different remanent magne-
tizations are related as DcD(H) = IRM( ) 2 IRM(H). More interestingly,
∞ − ·
the deviations from this equality, defined as
∆M(H) = DcD(H) [IRM( ) 2 IRM(H)] (28)
− ∞ − ·
quantify the character and strength of interparticle interactions and are obtained
experimentally (O’Grady et al 1993). Positive ∆M values imply interactions
with magnetizing character, and negative values indicate demagnetizing inter-
actions. We should say that this is only a phenomenological characterization
of the interactions, because Eq.(28) does not provide any information about
their microscopic origin. However, Eq.(28) has been proved a standard tool
for quantification of interparticle interactions in complex MNP assemblies such
as those used in modern industry of magnetic recording media (granular films,
particulate media). Interparticle interactions are discussed in the Section 4.
4 Interacting nanoparticle assemblies
4.1 Introduction
The magnetic interactions that are present in bulk magnetic materials pertain to
MNP assemblies and they preserve their physical origin and characteristics. In
particular, (direct) exchange between atomic moments separated by a few lat-
tice constants can couple ferromagnetically or antiferromagnetically two MNPs
via their surface atoms. Indirect exchange or Ruderman-Kittel-Kasuya-Yosida
(RKKY) interaction exists between MNPs hosted in a metallic matrix, which
provides free electrons required to mediate the interaction between the atomic
moments of the MNPs. Finally, magnetostatic interactions, which are of minor
importance in bulk magnets due to their weakness, become the dominant in-
teractions in MNP assemblies with well separated MNPs. This situation occurs
for two reasons. First, the exchange interactions have a very short range (up to
5 ˚A), the RKKY interactions have an oscillating FM/AFM character with a
∼
period of a few ˚A, which renders to zero their average effect on the MNP vol-
ume, so both have a weak effect in interparticle coupling. On the other hand,
magnetostatic interactions, in the lowest approximation, namely the dipolar
contribution, are proportional to the magnitude of the coupled magnetic mo-
ments, which for SD particles has an enormously large value compared to the
atomic moments (µ 103µ 103µ ).
MNP B atom
∼ ∼
Further on we discuss the effects of magnetostatic (dipolar) interactions on
the magnetic properties of MNP assemblies and their interplay with single-
particle anisotropy. The complexity of this problem arises from the long-range
( 1/d3, d being the interparticle distance) and anisotropic character of the
∼
dipolar interactions, namely the dependence of interaction energy on the orien-
tation of the moments relative to the bond joining the particle centers (Fig. 6).
19

Figure 6: Ground state configuration of magnetic nanoparticles with elliptic
shape coupled by magnetostatic (dipolar) forces. The easy axis coincides with
the long axis of the ellipse (shape anisotropy). Dipolar coupling induces anti-
ferromagnetic ordering when the moments are forced (by anisotropy) to remain
normal to the bond, as in (a). FM ordering (nose-to-tail) is favored when the
easy axes are parallel to the bond, as in (b). In an assembly with random
anisotropy, as in (c), the moments are aligned along the local easy axes. Dipo-
lar interactions have a complex effect, leading to misalignment of the moments
with respect to the local easy axis.
Understanding and controlling the effects of dipole-dipole interactions (DDI)
in MNP assemblies is of paramount importance to modern technology of mag-
netic recording media for two opposite reasons. First, DDI couple the MNPs
of an assembly. The ultimate goal in magnetic recording applications is to ad-
dress each MNP individually and treat it as a magnetic bit. In this case, DDI
have a parasitic role and one wishes to estimate and reduce their impact in the
magnetic properties of an assembly. On the contrary, magnetic logic devices,
have been proposed and built that exploit the magnetostatic coupling between
ordered MNP arrays (linear or planar) to transfer a magnetic bit (usually a
flipped moment) between two distant points in the array (Cowburn 2006). In
this case, DDI are of central importance and the goal is to enhance and tailor
their effects.
Over the last two decades, many research groups have prepared and mea-
sured MNP assemblies in various forms (granular films, ferrofluids, cluster as-
sembled films, self-assembled nanoparticles, lithographic arrays of magnetic
dots) and studied the intrinsic factors (host and particle material, particle size,
particle density) and the extrinsic factors (temperature, field, measurement pro-
tocol) that control the magnetic behavior. In many of these studies the presence
of magnetostatic interactions has been confirmed. Among the above mentioned
systems, the self-assembled MNPs prepared by a synthetic route offer the ad-
vantage of containing well separated MNPs with a very narrow size distribution
(σ 5 10%), so they are ideal systems to study DDI effects. Experimen-
V
∼ −
tal observations on self-assembled MNPs that have been attributed to DDI
include, reduction of the remanence at low temperature (Held 2001), increase
20

of the blocking temperature (Murray 2001), increase of the barrier distribution
width (Woods 2001), deviations of the zero-field cooled magnetization curves
from the Curie behavior (Puntes 2001), and difference between the in-plane
and out-of-plane remanence (Russier 2000). Long-range ferromagnetic order
in linear chains (Russier 2003), and hexagonal arrays (Puntes 2004, Yamamoto
2008) of dipolar coupled single-domain magnetic nanoparticles has been demon-
strated, supporting the existence of a dipolar superferromagnetic ground state,
characterized by ferromagnetic long-range order of the particle moments.
Investigations of the static and dynamic magnetic properties of dipolar in-
teracting nanoparticle assemblies brought up fundamental issues related to the
existence of a ground state which shares common features with spin glasses,
such as slow relaxation, memory and ageing effects (Sasaki 2005). The latter
are magnetic systems characterized by disorder and competing interactions that
produce an energy landscape with many local minima, considered responsible for
the occurrence of these effects. Dipolar interparticle interactions in dense and
random nanoparticle assemblies are believed to cause a spin-glass-like behavior
(Dormann 1997).
Theoretical models have been developed in an effort to explain these obser-
vations and related previous ones in assemblies with randomly located MNPs
(granular films, cluster-assembled films). On a microscopic level, the presence of
DDI between MNPs modifies the magnetization switching mechanism, which for
an isolated MNP obeys the N´eel-Arrhenius model. When anisotropic MNPs are
dipolar coupled, the reversal mechanism is determined by the interplay between
the single-particle anisotropy energy (E K V ) and the dipolar interaction en-
a 1
∼
ergy (E µ µ /r3 ). For weak interactions (E E ), the moments reverse
d i j ij d a
∼ ≪
independently by thermal activation over energy barriers, which are however
modified due to DDI. This limiting case is treated within a mean-field approxi-
mation and is discussed in Section 4.2. For strong interactions (E E ), the
d a
≫
single-particle reversal is no longer valid. Reversal of one particle can excite the
reversal of others, and the assembly behaves in a collective manner. Many-body
energy barriers exist in the system, with values that depend on the configuration
of all moments. Their evaluation becomes a formidable task and numerical sim-
ulations offer in this case an indispensable tool. Numerical methods are briefly
discussed in Section 4.3.
For a detailed review on the magnetic properties of dipolar interacting MNP
assemblies the reader is referred to the relevant literature (Dormann 1997, Far-
rell et al 2005, Knobel et al 2008, Kechrakos and Trohidou 2008). The role of
magnetostatic interactions in patterned magnetic media has been reviewed by
Mart´ın et al (Mart´ın 2003)
4.2 Mean Field models
In an early attempt to include the effect of interparticle interactions in the ther-
mal relaxation of MNPs , Shtrikman and Wohlfarth (Shtrikman 1981) assumed
that the single-particle anisotropy barrier of a MNP is increased by the Zeeman
energy due to the interaction field H produced by the moments of neighbor-
int
21

ing particles. In this model, the N´eel relaxation time is obtained from Eq.(16)
with the applied field H replaced by the interaction field H . The mean-field
int
approximations consists in replacing H by its thermal average value, which
int
in N´eel’s model is
H = H tanh(µ µH /k T) µ µH2 /k T (29)
int int 0 int B 0 int B
≈
the latter approximation being valid for weak interaction fields. Substitution of
Eq.(29) into Eq.(16) gives
K V + µ2µ2H2 /k T
τ = τ exp 1 0 int B . (30)
0
k T
" B #
Using the approximation 1 + x 1/(1 x) we write Eq.(30) in the form
≈ −
K V
1
τ τ exp (31)
0
≈ k (T T )
B 0
(cid:20) − (cid:21)
with T = µ2µ2H2 /k K V . Eq.(31), also known as the Vogel-Fulcher law,
0 0 int B 1
indicates that the relaxation time of an assembly of interacting MNPs is the
same as that of the isolated MNPs at a lower temperature.
In the Shtrikman-Wohlfarth model, the temperature T , or equivalently the
0
thermal average H2 , is not related to the microscopic parameters of the as-
int
sembly, i.e. particle location, and is treated as a phenomenological parameter,
fitted to experimental data. Dormann and colleagues (Dormann 1988, Dor-
mann 1997) developed a statistical model for the average barrier in a dipolar
interacting assembly which quantifies the interaction field and provides for the
single-particle energy barrier
E = K V + n a M2V L  (a µ2/V k T) (32)
b 1 1 1 s 1 B
with n the number of nearest neighbors of a particle, a = x /√2, x the
1 1 v v
volume concentration of the particles and L  ( ) the Langevin function. Eq.(32)
·
indicates that the anisotropy barrier is increased due to DDI, thus the model
of Dormann et al predicts an increase of the blocking temperature due to DDI.
This model behavior has been observed in almost all types of MNP assemblies,
with a few exceptions (Hansen and Mørup 1998).
More recently, Allia et al (Allia 2001) used also a phenomenological approach
to describe a superparamagnetic assembly with weak DDI. Namely, an assembly
in a regime that the remanence and coercivity vanish, but the field-dependent
magnetization varies with concentration of MNPs indicating the presence of
DDI. The authors (Allia 2001) suggested that the dipolar field changes at a high
rate and in random direction and therefore acts similar to the thermal field. The
effect is accounted for by an apparent increase of the system temperature. The
magnetization at temperature T is given by M = M L  [µH/k (T + T∗)], with
s B
T∗ related to the average dipolar energy via k T∗ = n µ2/d3 and obtained
B 1
by a fitting procedure. This model interpreted successfully the magnetization
behavior of Co nanoparticles in Cu matrix and established the existence of the
interacting superparamagnet regime (Allia 2001).
22

4.3 Numerical Techniques
The mean-field models have the advantage of providing analytical expressions
suitable for extracting system parameters from the experimental data by a fit-
ting process. However, they are not applicable to strongly dipolar systems and
they do not account for collective effects. Numerical techniques on the other
hand, have the major advantage that they treat rigorously the local and tempo-
ral statistical fluctuations of the macroscopic quantities characterizing the MNP
assembly and provide an efficient interpolation scheme between the weak and
the strong interaction regimes. We discuss briefly two most common numerical
approaches, the Monte Carlo (MC) method and the Magnetization Dynamics
(MD) method.
4.3.1 The Monte Carlo method
Different algorithms that mimic thermal fluctuations of the degrees of freedom of
a physical system by means of (pseudo)random numbers go under the umbrella
of Monte Carlo techniques. In the case of MNPs, two widely used algorithms
are the Metropolis Monte Carlo (MMC) and the Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC).
The former is appropriate for a description of the equilibrium behavior of an
assembly, while the latter also accounts, within a certain time scale, for the tran-
sition to equilibrium. Both algorithms provide thermal averages of macroscopic
quantities of interest in the canonical ensemble, i.e. at constant temperature.
To do so a sampling of the phase space is performed, however the sampling
procedures differ, as outlined below.
The MMC algorithm samples the phase space, visiting preferentially states
close to the equilibrium states (Importance Sampling). This is achieved when
subsequently visited states form a Markov chain, meaning that the probability of
visiting the next state depends only on the last visited one. To do so, one chooses
the transition from state s to s′ to occur with certainty, if it reduces the total
energy (E E s) and with a finite probability p(s s′) = exp( E s′−E s), if it
s′
≤ → − kT
increases the total energy (E > E ). Thus the system is allowed to climb-up
s′ s
energy barriers and slide-down toward energy minima until it reaches eventually
the global minimum.
In KMC the system jumps from a state s at a local minimum to a new state s′
being also a local minimum by overcoming a barrier E . The jump is performed
b
within a predefined time step ∆t with probability p(∆t) = 1 exp( ∆t/τ)
− −
where τ is the corresponding relaxation time with Arrhenius behavior, τ =
τ exp(E /kT).
0 b
In both algorithms, interparticle interactions are included by replacing the
applied field H with the total field H = H + H , which includes
i j(6=i) int,ij
the contribution from the interaction field H . In contrast to mean-field
int,ij
P
theories, in MC and MD (see next section) techniques the interaction field is
treated exactly, meaning that its value depends on the configuration of all the
moments of the assembly and it changes at each time-step.
An important distinction between the MC algorithms is that KMC simu-
23

lates the relaxation of the system in physical time, while time quantification of
the MMC time step is possible only in the absence of interparticle interactions
(Nowak 2000, Chubykalo 2003). However, a serious difficulty in KMC arises
from the calculation of the local energy barrier required to obtain the transi-
tion probability. In an interacting system the barrier depends on all degrees of
freedom and its calculation is a formidable task (Chubykalo 2004, Jensen 2006),
usually performed in an approximate manner (Pfeiffer 1990, Chantrell 2001).
Furthermore, the KMC assumes that the system evolves through thermally ac-
tivated jumps over energy barriers, an approximation that becomes invalid at
elevated temperatures (kT E ), or when collective behavior becomes impor-
b
∼
tant, as, for example, in strongly interacting MNPs. Collective effects are better
described within the MMC algorithm.
For a detailed description and technical implementation of MC algorithms
the interested reader could refer to the book by Landau and Binder (Landau
2000)
4.3.2 The Magnetization Dynamics method
In this method, the equations of motion for the magnetic moments are integrated
in time and time averages of the macroscopic magnetization are recorded. At
zero temperature, the time-evolution of a magnetic moment µ under a total
i
field H is described by the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert (LLG) equation
i
d µ
−→i
= A( µ −→H ) B µ ( µ −→H ) (33)
−→ i i−→i −→i i
dt − × − × ×
with A γ/(1 + α2), B αγ/(1 + α2)µ , γ the gyromagnetic ratio, and α a
i i
≡ ≡
dimensionless damping parameter. The first term on the r.h.s. of Eq.(33) is the
torque term leading to precession around the field axis and the second one is
a phenomenological damping torque that tends to align the precessing moment
with the field H .
i
The dynamics at finite temperature are described by introduction of an
additional field (H ) term in Eq.(33) with stochastic character. H is assumed
f,i f
to have zero time-average (white noise) and its values at different sites i,j or
different instants t,t′ are uncorrelated. The LLG equation augmented by the
thermal field term is commonly referred to as the Langevin or stochastic LLG
equation.
4.3.3 Time scale of numerical methods
The MC and MD techniques are complementary since they describe thermal
relaxation of magnetic properties in different time scales. In the MD method,
the characteristic time is a fraction ( 10−2) of the precessional (Larmor) period
∼
( 10−10s), which implies that simulation times up to 1 ns are presently
∼ ∼
attainable. Thus, MD is the appropriate scheme to investigate fast-relaxation
phenomena as, for example, the reversal path of magnetization under an applied
short field pulse (Berkov 2002, Suess 2002).
24

In KMC the characteristic time is the single-particle relaxation time (see
Eq.(14)), which is much larger than τ 10−10s in the temperature range
0
∼
of interest (kT E ), a fact that makes the method suitable to treat slow-
b
≪
relaxation problems, as, for example the thermal decay of magnetization in
permanent magnets, a phenomenon that evolves within days or years (Van de
Veerdonk 2002).
Finally, when static magnetic properties are concerned, the system is at a
stable (or metastable) state and the MMC is a powerful and sufficient scheme to
describe, for example, long range order at the ground state or collective behavior
at finite temperature (Kechrakos 1998, Jensen 2003).
4.3.4 MMC study of dipolar interacting assemblies : A case study
In this section we show typical results from MMC simulations of the magnetic
properties of dipolar interacting MNP assemblies (Kechrakos 1998, Kechrakos
2002). Our system contains N identical SD NPs with diameter D and uniaxial
anisotropy in a random direction. The MNPs are located randomly in space or
on the vertices of a hexagonal lattice. The former is an appropriate model for
granular samples, and the latter for self-assembled MNPs. The total energy of
the system is
S S 3(S R )(S R )
E = g i · j − i · ij i · ij k (S e )2 h (S H) (34)
i i i
R3 − · − ·
ij
ij i i
X b b b b b b X X
b b b
b
where S is the magnetic moment direction (spin) of the i-th particle, e is the
i i
easy-axis direction, and R is the center-to-center distance between particles
ij
i and jb. Hats indicate unit vectors. The energy parameters entering Eq.(34)
b
are: (i) the dipolar energy g µ2µ2/4πd3, with µ = M V the particle moment
0 s
≡
and d the minimum interparticle distance. (ii) the anisotropy energy k K V ,
1
≡
and (iii) the Zeeman energy h µ µH due to the applied dc field H. The
0
≡
energy parameters (g,k,h) entering Eq.(34), the thermal energy k T, and the
B
treatment history of the sample determine the micromagnetic configuration at a
certain temperature and field. The freedom to choose an arbitrary energy scale
makes the numerical results applicable to a class of materials with the same
parameter ratios rather than to a specific material. The crucial parameter that
determines the transition from single-particle to collective behavior is the ratio
of the dipolar to the anisotropy energy (g/k).
We show in Fig. 7 the concentration and temperature dependence of the
remanence magnetization of a random assembly. Notice in Fig. 7a, that weak
DDI produce an increase of the remanence with concentration, while strong DDI
have the opposite effect. Remarkably, the presence of free sample boundaries,
can reverse the increasing trend of the remanence, due to the presence of a de-
magnetizing field. When DDI are much stronger than single-particle anisotropy
(g/k 10), the remanence value is sensitive to the morphology of the assem-
∼
bly, as the peak around the percolation threshold indicates. This behavior is
explained by the anisotropic character of DDI (see Fig. 6). In Fig. 7b, DDI
25

   
0.6 0.6
(a) (b)  g/k=0
 g/k=1  x =0.157
0.5 0.5 V
)M / M( ecnenameR
sr
)s
M/r
0.4 0.4
M( ecne nameR
0.3 0.3
 
0.2 0.2
 g/k=10
0.1 0.1
 g/k=1
 g/k=0.25
0.0 0.0
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
Vol. Fraction (x ) Temperature (k T/K V)
V B 1
Figure 7: Dependence of the saturation isothermal remanence of a random
assembly (a) on volume fraction of MNPs, at very low temperature (t/k=0.001)
and, (b) on temperature, for fixed volume fraction. The particles have random
anisotropy. The data are obtained by MMC simulations.
interactions are shown to produce a much slower temperature decay, producing
finite remanence values above the blocking temperature of the isolated MNPs.
This result supports the predictions of the mean-field theory about the increase
of the measured blocking temperature in dipolar interacting systems (Dormann
1988).
In chemically-prepared, self-assembled MNPs the possibility to control the
interparticle separation by variation of the surfactant (Willard 2004) offers the
possibility to study the dependence of T on interparticle spacing while pre-
b
serving the geometrical arrangement of the assembly (hexagonal). In Fig. 8
we show results for the ZFC magnetization (M ) and the blocking tempera-
ZFC
ture as obtained from the peak of the M (T) curve for a hexagonal array of
ZFC
dipolar interacting MNPs with random anisotropy. Parameters corresponding
to Co nanoparticles are used (Kechrakos 2002). The characteristic dependence
of T on the inverse cube of interparticle spacing can be used as a proof of the
b
dominant character of DDI in an assembly. Notice also that M (T 0)
ZFC
≈
assumes a positive value that increases with d values. This feature arises from
the gradual formation of a long range ferromagnetic ground state, due to DDI.
More examples of MC or MD simulations and comparison to experiments
on MNP assemblies can be found in the relevant literature (Vedmedenko 2007,
Kechrakos and Trohidou 2008).
26

   
0)b
0.8 1.6
)M/M( noitazitengaM CFZ  T / b
sCFZ   
T( erutarepm     eT gnikcolB
0.6
1.4
3
0.4 (D/d)
---------  
1.2
0.375
0.225
0.2
0.10
0.05
0 1.0
0.0
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.30 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
    3
Temperature (k T/K V) (D/d)
B 1
Figure 8: ZFC curves and blocking temperature for an ordered (hexagonal)
assembly of identical MNPs with diameter D and center-to-center distance d.
(a) Evolution of ZFC curves with decreasing d values. (b) Linear scaling of T
b
with inverse cube of d. Data obtained by MMC simulations.
5 Summary
We have discussed the main theoretical concepts that pertain to the magnetiza-
tion properties of isolated (non-interacting) nanoparticles and their assemblies.
We estimated the critical radius for formation of single domain particles and
studied the zero-temperature magnetization reversal mechanism of coherent ro-
tation (Stoner-Wohlfarth model), the thermally activated reversal (N´eel-Brown
model) and the related phenomenon of superparamagnetism occurring above the
blocking temperature. Complications arising from size polydispersity, distribu-
tion of easy axes directions, and applied field on the relaxation time for mag-
netization reversal were discussed. Two standard experimental techniques for
(static) magnetic measurements, namely the field and temperature dependence
of magnetization were outlined. Finally, the subject of interparticle dipolar in-
teractions was introduced along with the most common theoretical techniques
used to analyze interacting systems. Examples from Monte Carlo studies of
MNP assemblies were given.
6 Future perspectives
The dynamic behavior of MNPs in the presence of interparticle interactions is
expected to remain a topic of intense scientific and technological research in
the coming years. The research effort is expected to focus on both the atomic
scale properties of individual magnetic nanoparticles and on the mesoscopic
27

| 3           | None      |
| (D/d)       |           |
| ---------   |           |
| 0.375       |           |
| 0.225       |           |
| 0.10        |           |
| 0.05        |           |
| 0           |           |
|:------------|:----------|
|             | 3         |
|             | (D/d)     |
|             | --------- |
|             | 0.375     |
|             | 0.225     |
|             | 0.10      |
|             | 0.05      |
|             | 0         |

properties of nanoparticle assemblies.
On the atomic scale, future goals will include : (i) Reduction of the mag-
netic particle size without violating thermal stability (superparamagnetic limit)
at room temperature . The technological benefit from progress in this direction
will be the development of magnetic data-storage media with higher areal den-
sity. Given that the SPM effect is not observed below a certain size of a MNP,
due to disorder effects on the particle surface, the search for new high-anisotropy
materials is required. Composite nanoparticles with a core-shell morphology
(Skumryev 2003) constitute an interesting perspective.
(ii) Understanding and control of surface effects. With reduction of particle size
the contribution from surface moments become of increasing importance. The
chemical structure of the surface (disorder, defects) controls the magnitude and
type of the surface anisotropy, which is usually much (up to 10 times) larger
∼
than the core anisotropy. Synthetic methods can offer indispensable routes to
surface structure modification. Ab-initio electronic structure calculations are a
valuable tool to predict the surface anisotropy values and modeling of MNPs as
multi-spin system will reveal complex magnetization reversal mechanisms be-
yond the Stoner-Wohlfarth model (Kachkachi 2000). Experiments on individual
nanoparticles (Wernsdorfer 2000) offer a unique test of the above theories.
The future task on the mesoscopic scale will be to understand and control col-
lective magnetic behavior in ordered nanostructures (self-assembled MNPs and
magnetic patterned media). Ordered nanostructures include chemically pre-
pared self-assembled MNPs and lithographically prepared magnetic patterned
media. Chemical synthesis of MNPs and self-assembly (bottom-up approach)
is a very promising and cost-effective method to produce ordered MNP arrays
(Willard 2004). However, deeper understanding and improvement of the self-
assembly process is required in order to achieve larger (beyond 1mm2) sample
area with structural coherence. There is still a remaining problem as nanopar-
ticles self-assemble into hexagonal arrays that are incompatible with the square
arrangements required in industrial applications. A resolution to this problem
could be the recently demonstrated templated assembly (Cheng 2004). Litho-
graphic patterning (top-down approach) offers better control over the geomet-
rical aspects of the assembly but cannot yet produce nanostructures with size
below 100nm (Martin 2003). Increase of lithographic resolution is demanded
∼
in order to achieve patterned media with smaller (below 0.1µm) characteristic
size. On the measurements side, improvement of existing techniques to probe
mesoscopic magnetic order and excitations is demanded. Recent examples are
the observation of mesoscopic sale magnetic order in self-assembled Co nanopar-
ticles by an indirect method (small-angle neutron scattering)(Sachan 2008) and
by direct methods such as magnetic force microscopy (Puntes 2004) and electron
holography (Yamamoto 2008). From the point of view of basic physics, ordered
nanostructures constitute model systems to study collective magnetic behavior
driven by magnetostatic interactions, because the size, the shape and the spatial
arrangement of the magnetic nanostructures is well controlled. Known phenom-
ena are to be demonstrated on the mesoscopic scale and new ones possibly to
be discovered. As a recent example, we refer to the observation of magnetic
28

frustration is magnetostatically coupled magnetic microrods (Wang 2006), a
phenomenon previously met in bulk magnetic random alloys (spin glasses).
Finally, progress in numerical modeling will provide methods for bridging the
atomic scale and the mesoscopic scale simulations. Such multi-scale simulations
point to the future of theoretical investigations in the field of relaxation in
magnetic nanoparticles and have only recently started to appear (Yanes 2007,
Kazantseva 2008).
References
Aharoni, A. 1965. Effect of a Magnetic Field on the Superparamagnetic Re-
laxation Time. Phys. Rev. 177: 793.
Allia, P., Coisson, M., Tiberto, P., et al. 2001. Granular Cu-Co alloys as
interacting superparamagnets. Phys. Rev. B 64: Art. No. 144420
Bean, C. P. and Jacobs, I. S. 1956. Magnetic Granulometry and Super-
Paramagnetism. J. Appl. Phys. 27: 1448-1452.
Bean, C. P. and Livingston, J. D. 1959. Superparamagnetism. J. Appl. Phys.
30: 120S-129S.
Berkov, D.V. 2002. Fast switching of magnetic nanoparticles: Simulation of
thermal noise effects using the Langevin dynamics IEEE Trans. Magn.
38(5): 2489-2495
Brown, W. F. Jr. 1963. Thermal fluctuations of single-domain particle. Phys.
Rev. 130: 1677-1686.
Cheng J. Y., Mayes, A. M. and Ross, C. A. 2004. Nanostructure engineering
by templated self-assembly of block copolymers. Nat. Mater. 3: 823-828.
Chantrell, R. W., Walmsley, N., Gore J., et al. 2001 Calculations of the sus-
ceptibility of interacting superparamagnetic particles Phys. Rev. B 63
(2): Art. No. 024410
Chubykalo, O., Nowak, U., Smirnov-Rueda, R., et al. 2003. Monte Carlo tech-
nique with a quantified time step : Application to the motion of magnetic
moments. Phys. Rev. B 67: Art. No. 064422
Chubykalo-Fesenko, O. A. and Chantrell, R. W. 2004. Numerical evaluation
of energy barriers and magnetic relaxation in interacting nanostructured
magnetic systems. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 343: 189-194
Cowburn, R. P. 2006. Where Have All the Transistors Gone ? Science 311 :
183-184.
Cullity, B. D. 1972. Introduction to Magnetic Materials. Addison-Wesley Pub-
lishing Company.
29

Coffey, W. T., Crothers, D. S. F. , Dormann, J. L., et al. 1998. Effect of an
oblique magnetic field on the superparamagnetic relaxation time : Influ-
ence of the gyromagnetic term. Phys. Rev. B 58: 3249-3266.
Coffey, W. T., Cregg, P. J. and Kalmykov, Yu. P. 1993. On the Theory
of Debye and N´eel Relaxation of Single Domain Ferromagnetic Particles.
Adv. Chem. Phys. 69: 263-315.
Darling, S. B. and Bader, S. D. 2005. A materials chemistry perspective on
nanomagnetism. J. Mater. Chem. 15: 4189-4195.
Dormann, J. L., Bessais, L. and Fiorani, D. 1988. A dynamic study of small
interacting particles: superparamagnetic model and spin-glass laws. J.
Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 21: 2015-2034.
Dormann, J. L., Fiorani, D., and Tronc, E. 1997. Magnetic relaxation in fine-
particle systems. Adv. Chem. Phys. 98: 283-494.
Farrell, D., Cheng, Y., McCallum, R. W., et al. 2005. Magnetic interactions
of iron nanoparticles in arrays and dilute dispersions. J. Phys. Chem. B
109: 13409-13419.
Garanin, A., Kennedy, E. C., Crothers, D. S. F., et al. 1999. Thermally acti-
vated escape rates of uniaxial spin systems with transverse field: Uniaxial
crossovers. Phys. Rev. E 60: 6499.
Hansen, M. F. and Mørup, S. 1988. Models for the dynamics of interacting
magnetic nanoparticles. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 184: 262-274.
Held, G. A., Grinstein, G., Doyle, H., et al. 2001. Competing interactions in
dispersions of superparamagnetic nanoparticles. Phys. Rev. B 64: Art.
No. 012408.
Jensen, P. J. and Pastor, G. M. 2003. Low-energyproperties of two-dimensional
magnetic nanostructures: interparticle interactions and disorder effects.
New J. Phys. 5: Art. No. 68
Jensen, P. J. 2006. Average energy barriers in disordered interacting magnetic
nanoparticles. Comp. Mater. Science 35: 288-291
Kazantseva, N., Hinzke, D., Nowak, U., et al. 2008. Towards multiscale mod-
eling of magnetic materials: Simulations of FePt. Phys. Rev. B 77: Art.
No. 184428.
Kachkachi H, Ezzir A, Nogues M, et al. 2000. Surface effects in nanoparticles:
application to maghemite γ-Fe O Eur. J. Phys. B 14(4): 681-689.
2 3
Kechrakos, D. and Trohidou, K. N. 1998. Magnetic properties of dipolar in-
teracting single-domain particles. Phys. Rev. B 58: 12169-12177.
30

Kechrakos, D. and Trohidou, K. N. 2002. Magnetic properties of self-assembled
interacting nanoparticles. Appl. Phys. Lett. 81: 4574-4576.
Kechrakos, D., and Trohidou, K.N. 2008. Dipolar interaction effects in the
magnetic and magnetotransport properties of ordered nanoparticle arrays.
J. Nanoscience Nanotech. 8(6): 2929-2943.
Kodama, R. H. 1999. Magnetic nanoparticles. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 200:
359-372.
Knobel, M., Nunes, W. C., and Sokolovsky, L. M., et al. 2008. Superparam-
agnetism and other magnetic features in granular materials. J. Nanosci.
Nanotechnol. 8: 2836-2857
Landau, D. P. and Binder, K. 2000. A Guide to Monte Carlo Simulations in
Statistical Physics. Cambridge University Press.
Mart´ın, J. I., Nogu´es, J, Liu, K., et al. 2003. Ordered magnetic nanostructures:
Fabrication and properties. J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 256: 449-501
Moser, A., Takano, K., Margulies, D. T., et al. 2002. Magnetic recording:
advancing into the future. J. Phys. D.: Appl. Phys. 35: R157-R167.
Murray, C. B., Sun, S., Doyle, H., et al. 2001. Monodisperse 3d transition-
metal (Co, Ni, Fe) nanoparticles and their assembly into nanoparticle
superlattices. MRS Bull. 26: 985-991.
N´eel, L. 1949. Influence de fluctuations thermiques sur l’ aimantation de grains
ferromagn´etiques tr´es fins. Compt. Rend. 228: 664-666
Nowak, U., Chantrell, R. W., and Kennedy, E. C. 2000. Monte Carlo simula-
tion with time-step quantification in terms of Langevin dynamics. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 84: 163-166.
Nunes, W. C., Folly, W. S. D. , Sinnecker, J. P., and Novak, M. A. 2004.
Temperature dependence of the coercive field in single-domain particle
systems. Phys. Rev. B 70: Art. No. 014419.
O’Grady, K., El-Hilo, M., and Chantrell, R.W. 1993. The characterization of
interaction effects in fine-particle systems. IEEE Trans. Magn. 29(6):
2608-2613.
Petit, V., Taleb, A., and Pileni, M.P. 1998. Self-organization of magnetic
nanosized cobalt particles. Adv. Mater. 10: 259-261.
Pfeiffer, H. 1990. Determination of anisotropy field distribution in particle
assemblies taking into account thermal fluctuations. Phys. Stat. Sol. (a)
118: 295-306.
Puntes, V. F., Krishnam, K. M., and Alivisatos, A.P. 2001. Colloidal nanocrys-
tal shape and size control: The case of cobalt. Science 291: 2115-2117.
31

Puntes, V. F., Gorostiza, P., Aruguete, D. M., et al. 2004. Collective behavior
in two-dimensional cobalt nanoparticle assemblies observed by magnetic
force microscopy. textitNat. Mater. 3: 263-268.
Russier, V., Petit, C., Legrand, J., et al. 2000. Collective magnetic properties
of cobalt nanocrystals self-assembled in a hexagonal network: Theoretical
model supported by experiments. Phys. Rev. B 62: 3910-3916.
Russier, V., Petit, V. and Pileni, M.P. 2003. Hysteresis curve of magnetic
nanocrystals monolayers: Influence of the structure. J. Appl. Phys. 93:
10001-10010.
Sachan M., Bonnoit, C., Majetich, S. A., et al. 2008. Field evolution of
magnetic correlation lengths in ǫ-Co nanoparticle assemblies. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 92(15): Art. No. 152503.
Sasaki, M., J¨onsson, P.E., Takayama, H., et al. 2005. Aging and memory
effects in superparamagnets and superspin glasses. Phys. Rev. B 71(10):
Art. No. 104405.
Skumryev, V., Stoyanov, S., Zhang, Y. , et al. 2003. Beating the superparam-
agnetic limit with exchange bias. Nature 423: 850-853.
Stoner, E. C. and Wohlfarth, E. P. 1948. A mechanism of magnetic hysteresis
in heterogeneous alloys. Proc. R. Soc. London A 240: 599-642.
Shtrikman, S. and Wohlfarth, E. P. 1981. The theory of Vogel-Fulcher law of
spin glasses. Phys. Lett. A 85(8,9): 467-470.
Suess, D., Schrefl, T., Scholz, W., et al. 2002 Fast switching of small magnetic
particles J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 242: 426-429.
Van de Veerdonk, R. J. M., Wu, X. W., Chantrell, R. W., et al. 2002. Slow
dynamics in perpendicular media. IEEE Trans. Magn. 38(4): 1676-1681
Vedmedenko, E. Y. 2007. Competing Interactions and Patterns in Nanoworld.
Wiley-VCH Verlag.
Wang, R.F., Nisoli, C., Freitas, R.S., et al. 2006. Artificial ’spin ice’ in a
geometrically frustrated lattice of nanoscale ferromagnetic islands. Nature
439(7074): 303-306.
Wernsdorfer, W., Mailly, D. and Benoit, A. 2000. Single nanoparticle mea-
surement techniques. textitJ. Appl. Phys. 87(9): 5094-5096.
Willard, M. A., Kurihara, L. K., Carpenter, E. E., et al. 2004. Chemically
prepared magnetic nanoparticles Int. Mater. Rev. 49 : 125-170
Wohlfarth, E. P. 1958. Relations between different modes of acquisition of the
remanent magnetization of ferromagnetic particles. J. Appl. Phys. 29:
595-596
32

Woods, S. I., Kirtley, J. R., Sun, S., et al. 2001. Direct investigation of
superparamagnetism in Co nanoparticle films. Phys. Rev. Lett. 87:
137205-137208.
Yamamoto, K., Majetich, S.A., McCartney, M.R., et al. 2008. Direct visu-
alization of dipolar ferromagnetic domain structures in Co nanoparticle
monolayers by electron holography. Appl. Phys. Lett. 93(8): Art. No.
082502
Yanes, R., Chubykalo-Fesenko, O., Kachkachi, H., et al. 2007. Effective
anisotropies and energy barriers of magnetic nanoparticles with N´eel sur-
face anisotropy. Phys. Rev. B 76(6): Art. No. 064416
33