Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high
power lasers
3102 luJ 3  ]hp-msalp.scisyhp[  2v9586.6031:viXra
Macchi1,2 Sgattoni1,3 Sinigardi,4 Borghesi5,6
A , A , S , M , and
3
M Passoni
1
Istituto Nazionale di Ottica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR/INO), U.O.S.
“Adriano Gozzini”, Pisa, Italy
andrea.macchi@ino.it
E-mail:
2
Dipartimento di Fisica “Enrico Fermi”, Universit`a di Pisa, Largo Bruno Pontecorvo
3, I-56127 Pisa, Italy
3
Dipartimento di Energia, Politecnico di Milano, Via Ponzio 34/3, I-20133 Milan,
Italy
4
Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia and INFN, Universit`a di Bologna, via Irnerio
46, 40126 Bologna, Italy
5
Centre for Plasma Physics, The Queen’s University of Belfast, BT71NN Belfast, UK
6
Institute of Physics of the ASCR, ELI-Beamlines Project, Na Slovance 2, 18221
Prague, Czech Republic
Abstract. A short overview of laser-plasma acceleration of ions is presented. The
focus is on some recent experimental results and related theoretical work on advanced
regimes. These latter include in particular target normal sheath acceleration using
ultrashort low-energy pulses and structured targets, radiation pressure acceleration
in both thick and ultrathin targets, and collisionless shock acceleration in moderate
density plasmas. For each approach, open issues and the need and potential for further
developments are briefly discussed.
PACS numbers: 52.38.-r 41.75.Jv 52.27.Ny
Submitted to: Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion
1. Introduction
Ion acceleration driven by superintense laser-plasma interaction with dense materials has
been attracting an enormous interest in the last thirteen years because of the several
foreseen applications such as fast ignition, medical hadrontherapy, nuclear and particle
physics. Thanks to the continuous progress in high power laser technology and also in
target manufacturing and engineering, several different acceleration mechanisms have
been either demonstrated or proposed. Still, it is an open question to establish which
mechanism is most promising for each application, as most of the requirements for ion

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 2
energy, conversion efficiency, spectral width, brilliance and suitability for high repetition
rate operation have yet to be met.
In this paper we provide a partial update of our recent review of the field [1] (see
also [2] for a complementary review) focusing on a selection of most recent results and
emerging topics, and highligthing some contributions by our group. The emphasis is on
basic acceleration mechanisms and general strategies to improve their performance.
2. Advances in Target Normal Sheath Acceleration of protons
Target Normal Sheath Acceleration (TNSA) is recognized as the basic mechanism of
acceleration of protons from solid targets (typically in the 0.1 − 10 µm thickness range)
in most of the experiments reported so far, and has become the reference framework
for source optimization. In TNSA, the protons are accelerated by the sheath field
generated at the rear surface of the target by the energetic “fast” electrons accelerated
at the front surface, where the laser-plasma interaction occurs. Thus, the enhancement
of the maximum energy and conversion efficiency of protons is strictly related to the
mechanisms of fast electron acceleration and transport through the target. Similarly,
“engineering” of TNSA accelerating field by particular target shaping has been used for
proton beam focusing and manipulation.
2.1. TNSA with ultrashort pulses
Several groups have investigated proton acceleration using laser systems with pulse
durations of few tens of fs, typically delivering a total energy or a few Joules. Such
laser systems have a compact size and potential for high repetition rate as required by
most applications. The use of very tight focusing, producing laser spots with diameter
of the order of one wavelength λ, combined with the ultrashort duration allows to reach
21 −2
intensities up to 10 W cm . The availability of pulses with very high contrast allows
using very thin targets (from a few µm down to tens of nm) which in principle may
yield higher densities and/or temperatures of fast electrons, and thus higher accelerating
fields, due to the effects of energy confinement and electron recirculation.
Here we analyse a set of experiments with ultrashort pulses in an attempt to infer
scaling and trends of the proton energy versus laser and target parameters. The data are
taken from experiments performed in different laboratories i.e. HZDR Dresden (DRACO
laser) [3, 4], LLC Lund [5], GIST/APRI Gwangju (LiFSA) [6, 7], JAEA/KPSI Kyoto
(JKAREN) [8] and CUOS Ann Arbor (HERCULES) [9]. This analysis is meant to
update and be complementary to previously published surveys of data from different
experiments and related inferred scalings, including comparison with theoretical models
(see e.g. [2, 3, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14]).
Since in experiments the observed cut-off energy of protons E may be determined
co
by the detection threshold, a proper comparison of different results may require to
compare the full spectra or, at least, to take into account both E and the corresponding
co

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 3
Figure 1. Proton energy from experiments using high contrast, sub-100 fs, sub-10 J
laser pulses and thin solid targets. Data are from Refs.[5] (N06, empty circles), [3]
(Z10, filled down-triangles), [6] (C11, diamonds), [4] (Z12, filled squares), [8] (O12,
filled circles), [7] (M12, empty squares and stars) and [9] (D13, filled up-triangles). All
target are planar foils of various thickness (in the 0.05−4.0 µm range) except for data
marked by stars which are for a structured target (thin foil covered by sub-micron
size spheres). Data represented by empty and filled symbols are for intensities in the
19 −2 21 −2
I = (1−5)×10 W cm and I = (0.8−2)×10 W cm ranges, respectively. The
pulse durations are in the τ = (25−40) fs range. Frame a): spectral density of protons
N (E) as a function of the proton energy E. Dashed lines are simple exponential
p
interpolations N (E) = N exp(−E/T ) to observed complete spectra where available.
p p0 p
Frame b): cut-off energy E as a function of the laser pulse energy contained in the
co
laser spot (defined as the area with diameter corresponding to the FWHM of the
intensity profile). Frame c): the width parameter T , from exponential interpolations
p
of the spectra in frame a), also as a function of the energy in the spot.
number density n = n (E ) with n the number of protons per energy and solid angle.
co p co p
Figure 1 a) summarizes available information by plotting n as a function of the proton
p
energy E for the selected experiments. All reported spectra are well approximated by
exponential functions n ∼ exp(−E/T ), “truncated” at the observed cut-off E .
p p co
In Fig.1 a) an increasing trend in both Eco and T with the pulse energy is apparent.
p
In detail, T has similar values for the low intensity data (empty symbols) while for the
p
high intensity data (filled symbols) T increases with the pulse energy and is almost
p
proportional to E . It is also noticeable that the data obtained for higher values of
co
pulse intensity and energy correspond to lower values of the number of protons.
Fig.1 b) and c) show E and T as a function of the pulse energy in the laser
co p
spot, defined as the region corresponding to full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) of the
intensity profile. This choice is made on the basis of available information on laser
spot size and intensity distribution in Refs.[3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] and allows accounting
for different focusing optics and plasma mirror efficiencies as well as facilitating the
comparison with theoretical models. The amount of energy in the laser spot is typically
in the 20%-50% range of the total laser energy, and the values reported in Fig.1 b) and

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 4
c) fall in the < 2 J range.‡
Fig.1 b) and c) show that E is roughly proportional to T with an increasing trend
co p
of both quantities with the laser pulse energy. The scaling with the laser intensity I
appears instead to be much weaker than that with energy. The dependence on the target
thickness does not show a clear trend, with the spread of observed values of E being
co
much smaller than range of thicknesses (0.05 − 4.0 µm). This latter observation is in
qualitative agreement with parametric studies which show a relatively weak dependence
on the target thickness in this regime [3, 4, 9, 15].
2.2. TNSA modelling
The above discussed experimental results may stimulate further advances in TNSA
modelling. Since the first experiments there has been a demand for models yielding
reasonably simple scaling laws, able to fit the observed dependencies on laser and target
parameters. Ideally such theoretical effort should also reduce the need of additional
empirical or “phenomenological” fitting parameters (such as, e.g., the maximum
acceleration time) thus raising the predictive power of the models. Noticeably, several
recent works have addressed the common problem of going beyond the assumption of a
simple Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution for electrons, because of known problems with,
e.g., the divergence of the accelerating potential at infinity (see e.g. Ref.[1], Sec.IIIC).
An extension of the static TNSA modelling for arbitrary electron distribution
has been obtained by Schmitz [16]. Intriguingly, the use of an “universal” electron
distribution proposed by Sherlock [17] on the basis of 1D simulations yields an upper
limit of 66 MeV for the cut-off energy in the case of ultrashort pulse, when the
ponderomotive scaling is used for the fast electron temperature, i.e. T = T where
f pond
c2 a2 /2)1/2
T = m (1 + − 1 , (1)
pond e 0
(cid:2) (cid:3)
0.85(Iλ2 /1018 cm−2 µm2 )1/2
and a = W is the dimensionless laser amplitude. A very
0
close upper limit of 65 MeV has been also observed in 3D PIC simulations for simple
flat targets and pulses with energy below 2 J [18]. Thus, going beyond such energy
limit could require the exploitation of particular mechanisms of fast electron generation,
providing a more favourable scaling than (1). The use of specially structured targets,
to be discussed in the next section, is an effort in such direction.
Amongst static TNSA models, Passoni et al [19] have recently improved a previous
model [12] by accounting for electron recirculation effects in thin targets. In this way a
dependence of the cut-off value of the accelerating potential upon both target thickness
and laser energy, which was previously inferred on an empirical basis, has been refined
and motivated. A preliminary investigation (which will be reported elsewhere) with this
‡ Following our choice some quoted values of the “energy on target” have been corrected for the
comparison. For example, in Refs.[3, 4] reporting experiments with the DRACO laser, it is reported
that 80% of the laser energy is contained into a spot delimited approximately by the distance at which
−2
the intensity falls by e . Assuming a Gaussian distribution, the energy in the smaller spot defined by
the FWHM has been calculated and used in Fig.1 b) and c).

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 5
model of some of the experimental data reported in Fig.1 seems to confirm its predicting
capabilities, highlighting at the same time novel open issues characterizing the TNSA
regime when ultrashort and tightly focused laser pulses are used.
In the context of dynamic TNSA models, Kiefer et al [14] have revisited the problem
of adiabatic plasma expansion for a steplike electron distribution. Deviations due to non-
Maxwellian distributions are shown to be important and relevant to the interpretation
of experiments. Kinetic effects in thin foil expansion have been also recently considered
by Diaw and Mora [20].
For ultrashort pulses the assumption of quasi-equilibrium for electrons may become
questionable. Zeil et al. [4] have experimentally investigated the “pre-thermal” stage of
TNSA where the fast electrons in the sheath are out of equilibrium: the demonstration
of proton beam steering by tilting the laser pulse wavefronts (resulting in a “target non-
normal” acceleration) showed that the ultrashort laser pulse promptly affects the sheath
parameters. Non-thermal acceleration of protons in the backward direction (towards the
laser pulse) has been also investigated with extremely short (5 fs) pulses [21]. Here we
sketch a very simple model of TNSA out of equilibrium. Assuming that electrons get
to the rear surface with a momentum p = m γ v as short bunches separated in time
0 e 0 0
by a laser period T = 2π/ω , they turn back under the action of a uniform field that
L L
reverses the electron momentum to −p and thus gives a kick up to 2p to protons
0 0
at the surface. Since the number of kicks is ∼ (τ/T ) with τ the pulse duration, the
L
2 2 2
total momentum gain is p = 2p (τ/T ) yielding an energy p /2m = (2p /m )(τ/T ) .
i 0 L i i 0 i L
2 2 2
Taking p ≃ m ca we obtain a scaling E ≃ 2m c a (τ/T ) (m /m ) similarly to
0 e 0 p e 0 L e p
Ref.[21]. If we rather model the fast electrons as a long bunch of density n , the
f
field at the surface will initially grow in time as E = 4πen v t. As far as electron
s f 0
trajectories do not self-intersect, an electron emitted at the time t will return to the
0
2
target at t = t +2p /E (t ) = t +2γ /(ω t ) and the space-charge field will be largely
r 0 0 s 0 0 0 pf 0
)1/2
cancelled at t = (2γ /ω such that dt /dt = 0. Protons will thus gain a momentum
s 0 pf r 0
ts 2 2 2 2
p ≃ e E (t)dt = m v γ and an energy E ≃ m v γ (m /2m ) ∼ m c a (m /m ).
i 0 s e 0 0 p e 0 0 e p e 0 e p
)1/2
The secRond model should be more appropriate if T < t , i.e. for ω /ω < (2γ /2π
L r pf L 0
which means that the fast electron density n should not largely exceed the critical
f
2 2 2
density n = m ω /(4πe ). We thus see that despite the fast scaling with a the proton
c e L 0
energy gain is limited by the m /m factor.
e p
For reasons of calculation feasibility almost all the analytical models of TNSA are
one-dimensional, so that multi-dimensional effects may be addressed only by simulations,
mostly performed using PIC codes. The increase of supercomputing power now
allows large scale simulations to be performed up to three spatial dimensions (3D).
This is particularly relevant for reliable quantitative predictions on TNSA because 3D
simulations typically show proton energies lower by a factor of & 2 with respect to 2D
simulations with the same parameters [18, 22]. At the same time, TNSA simulations
remain very demanding because of issues such as large density variations in the sheath,
steep gradients at the laser-plasma interface, and long duration of the acceleration stage.

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 6
2.3. TNSA in engineered targets
High-contrast pulses also allow to study the interaction with targets having nano- and
micro-structured surfaces, since the structures may be not blown out by the prepulse.
Thus, target engineering of various type has been investigated in order to optimize fast
electron parameters (such as number, energy, and divergence) for more efficient TNSA.
Still for sub-10 J pulses, Margarone et al [7] have investigated targets covered by a
monolayer of sub-micron spheres. These data are also shown in Fig.1 and the comparison
shows an increase both in E and in T with respect to flat targets at small angles of
co p
incidence. However, measurements with the same type of targets at the SLIC facility
(CEA Saclay) have found TNSA enhancement to be almost absent at large angles of
incidence [23].
At SLIC an increase in E has been also observed in “grating” targets [24, 25]
co
having a periodical surface modulation with sub-wavelength depth. For this experiment,
Fig.2 a) shows E as a function of the incidence angle for both grating and plane targets
co
having a depth of ∼ 20 µm. The laser pulse energy in the FWHM spot and the intensity
19 −2
were 0.3 J and 2.5×10 W cm , respectively. The maximum enhancement is observed
for the angle at which the resonant excitation of surface waves is expected. The achieved
values of E are somewhat limited by the large value of the target thickness, since
co
the surface structuring of very thin foils is difficult. At the same time, the details of
proton emission provide a very useful diagnostic for the laser absorption and electron
acceleration mechanisms in the presence of microstructures.§
Use of “shaped” targets (having a structure size of the order of the laser spot, i.e.
a few µm) and high laser contrast allow also to achieve higher proton energies for pulse
2 3
of relatively long duration (0.1 − 1 ps) and high energy (10 − 10 J). Using specially
designed microcone targets and the 80 J, 700 fs, high contrast pulse of the TRIDENT
7
laser at LANL, Gaillard et al [27] were able to detect about 10 protons/MeV at a cut-off
energy E = 67.5 MeV, to be compared with E ≃ 50 MeV in flat targets. The cut-off
co co
energy was higher than the long-lasting record of 58 MeV observed with > 400 J pulses
at the LLNL petawatt by Snavely et al [28]. However, it has to be noticed that in the
9
spectrum measured in LLNL experiments E corresponded to about 10 protons/MeV,
co
a number for which the spectrum measured at TRIDENT for microcone targets yields
about 40 MeV. Thus, the higher energy cut-off observed might be partly attributed
to an increased sensitivity in the detector. Nevertheless, the cone target results also
compare favourably with respect to those of Robson et al [29] which found protons
up to 55 MeV at similar proton/MeV numbers using 400 J, 1 − 8 ps pulses from the
VULCAN petawatt laser at RAL, and similar value of the target thickness.
The performance of the cone targets appears to be based on efficient electron
§ Using a particular form of cryogenic structured “snow” targets Zigler et al [26] have observed up
to 21 MeV protons with a 2 J laser pulse at MBI Berlin. Both the number and emittance of such
energetic protons appear to be lower than what is observed in TNSA experiments, and the acceleration
is effective for low pulse contrast. Hence the acceleration mechanism is presumably quite different from
TNSA.

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 7
E 2D
a) b) co foam
3D
2D
Laser
no foam
3D
t
 10  5e+21
 5  4e+21
]3-mc[ ne
]mµ[ y
 0  3e+21
-5  2e+21
-10  1e+21
-15 -10 -5  0  5  10
x [µm]
Figure 2. Examples of ion acceleration in “engineered” targets. Frame a):
enhancement of cut-off proton energy in laser interaction with grating targets. The
cut-off energy increases by a factor of ∼ 2.5 with respect to plane targets around
the expected angle for resonant excitation of surface waves. Details can be found in
Ref.[25]. Frame b): PIC simulation of channel boring in a low-density foam layer on the
surface of a thin target. The cartoon shows the schematic of a cone target resembling
the channel shape. The plot in the upper right frame reports the cut-off energy (in
MeV) as a function of time (in fs) for 2D and 3D simulations, with and without the
21 −2
foam layer. The foam layer density and thickness are n = 2n = 3.4 × 10 W cm
e c
20 −2
and d = 2λ = 1.6 µm. The laser pulse has peak amplitude a = 10 (I = 10 W cm ),
0
25 fs duration and 3 µm waist radius .
acceleration in cone geometry [30]. Indeed, some features of the acceleration mechanism
such as coupling with the cone walls at local grazing incidence and existence of an
optimal cone length are also apparent in simulations of channel drilling in a near-critical
density plasma [22]. In a thin target covered with a near-critical layer, efficient electron
acceleration may yield electron temperatures up to T ≃ 3T and up to a three-fold
f pond
increase in E with respect to targets without foam layers: see the simulation results
co
shown in Fig.2 b) where the effect of 3D geometry versus 2D is also shown. Simulations
of this scheme have been performed so far for ultrashort, low-energy pulses because
of computational limitations. Also experimentally the scheme has been tested in the
short-pulse regime and with foam thicknesses suitable to imply a gain at low intensity
conditions [31, 32]. Further investigations with longer pulses are needed to compare
with cone targets.
2.4. Proton focusing and spectral manipulation
Suitably shaped targets have been also used since the first experiments to focus the
proton beam, without the need of an external steering system and allowing the focusing
of large number of protons as it would be required by fast ignition and high energy

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 8
density physics applications. Recently, progress on this side has been obtained by Bartal
et al [33] on TRIDENT using cone targets similar to those designed for fast ignition
research. Focusing by concave targets has been investigated also at LULI [34] revealing
an issue of proton beam filamentation and emittance degradation.
Another possibility of present interest is based on the use of the strong quasistatic
magnetic fields generated during the laser-plasma interaction and related to the process
of sheath formation and evolution itself. Early analysis of experiments on ultrathin
foils traced back spectral modulations in the low-energy part of the proton spectrum
to the effect of magnetic fields >10 MG generated at the rear surface within tens of fs
[35]. Measurements based on the proton probing technique [36] gave both evidence of
the generation of fields of several tens of MG by the “fountain effect” of fast electrons
[37] and of their capability to either focus or defocus multi-MeV protons. Very recent
experiments on the TITAN laser at LLNL have tested this concept [38].
The engineering of target geometry and composition has been also investigated
with the aim to manipulate the TNSA spectrum and obtain suitably monoenergetic
distributions reducing the need of external filtering devices (see e.g. sec.III.E.2 in
Ref.[1]). However, recently there seems to have been little progress on this side. For
instance a seemingly promising approach based on targets with nanolayers deposited
on their rear side [39, 40] has not been further developed. These issues, as well as the
uncertainties in reaching via TNSA-based schemes the high energies > 100 MeV/nucleon
required by some applications, motivate the search for alternate mechanisms which we
describe in the next sections.
3. Towards Radiation Pressure Acceleration
3.1. RPA in thick targets: hole boring
The radiation pressure of an intense laser pulse pushes the plasma surface inwards,
creating a bow-shaped deformation. For thick targets, such that the deformation front
does not reach the rear side of the target during the pulse, this regime has been
commonly named as “hole boring” (HB). Assuming a uniform density, cold plasma
target with mass density ρ = Am n = (A/Z)m n , the fastest ions have an energy per
p i p e
nucleon (see sec.IV.A.1 of Ref.[1] and references therein)
Π I Z m n
2 e c 2
E = 2m c , Π = = a . (2)
HB p 1 + 2Π1/2 ρc3 A m n 0
p e
cΠ1/2 Π1/2
corresponding to twice the velocity of the receding surface v = /(1 + ).
HB
Recently a theory of HB-RPA including effects of temperature, pulse envelope and
density inhomogeneity has been presented by Levy et al [41] who also discuss possible
relevance of HB experiments to astrophysical scenarios, such as Poynting flux-dominated
outflows.
Simulations of HB-RPA show that the fast ions may have a narrow energy spread
and thus lead to a non-thermal, peaked ion energy spectrum particularly for a circularly

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 9
polarized pulse at normal incidence since fast electron generation and, consequently,
TNSA are strongly suppressed. Protons with energy ≃ 1 MeV and ≃ 10% energy
spread were observed in an experiment at Brookhaven National Laboratory (US) [42]
where a circularly polarized CO pulse of amplitude a = 0.5 and a gas H jet target
2 0
were used allowing values of n /n & 1. The potential advantages of this experimental
e c
scheme are the reduction of the electron density to increase E , the pure proton plasma
HB
and the suitability for high repetition rate.
The scaling with density makes the transition to HB-RPA hard to observe in solid
2
targets where n & 10 n . However, either the presence of a significant preplasma or
e c
the use of advanced targets at low density (liquid hydrogen jets would be particularly
suitable) may allow to work with n /n & 1 also with optical lasers. The approach
e c
might be of interest especially for next-generation short-pulse lasers aiming at very
large values of a with modest pulse energy and possibly allowing high repetition
0
rate operation. Related simulation studies and suggestions for experiments have been
reported in Refs.[43, 44, 45].
3.2. RPA in thin targets: light sail
For thin targets of thickness ℓ ≪ v τ, RPA enters into the “light sail” (LS) mode
HB
in which the whole target is accelerated. For LS, the scaling is now with the pulse
fluence Iτ (total energy per unit surface) divided by the areal density of the target (see
sec.IV.A.2 of Ref.[1] and references therein):
2 2
(Ωτ) 2I Z m a n ℓ
2 −1 e 0 e
E = m c , Ω = = T , ζ = π .(3)
LS p 2(Ωτ + 1) ρℓc2 L A m ζ n λ
p c
The LS operation is limited by the onset or relativistic transparency when a > ζ,
0
thus the “optimal” matching of the areal density with the pulse amplitude occurs for
a = ζ.k This condition is presently accessible thanks to manufacturing techniques for
0
foils as thin as a few nm, for which typically ζ . 10. Of course ultrahigh contrast
is necessary for this type of experiment. Posing a = ζ and Z/A = 1/2 in Eq.(3)
0
and assuming non-relativistic ions (Ωτ ≪ 1), we may write a simplified scaling law for
LS-RPA using optimal thickness targets:
2 2 2 2
m c τ Iτ
E(opt) = e a2 ≃ 2.3 MeV× = 2.3 MeVI τ2 , (4)
LS 8m 0 (cid:18)T (cid:19) 10−6 J s cm−2 20 100
p L
20 −2
where I and τ are the intensity and pulse duration in units of 10 W cm and
20 100
100 fs, respectively. The more favourable scaling with pulse duration than with intensity
is due to the latter being limited by the transparency threshold. Eq.(4) shows that
energies > 100 MeV per nucleon are within reach of present-day petawatt systems.
k Strictly speaking this condition is derived on the basis of a simple model of delta-like foil plasmas
and has been verified by simulations using circularly polarized, ultrashort pulses (see e.g. Ref.[46]). In
more general cases the “optimal” thickness value determined by transparency effects may have a more
complex dependence on the laser pulse parameters (see e.g. Refs.[47, 48, 49]).

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 10
Several recent experiments have investigated the interaction with ultrathin foils
obtaining indications of the onset of LS-RPA. Using the VULCAN petawatt pulse
20 −2
(∼ 800 fs, I = 0.5 − 3 × 10 W cm ) Kar et al observed spectral peaks for both
protons and heavier (e.g. carbon) ions, with energies up to 10 MeV/nucleon, and
2
inferred from data a scaling of the peak energy as (Ωτ) in accordance with Eq.(3)
for Ωτ ≪ 1. Similar results have been obtained by Aurand et al [50] using the much
19 −2
shorter pulse (27 fs, I = 0.2 −6 × 10 W cm ) of the JETI laser at Jena. Common to
both experiments was a weak dependence upon the laser polarization and a separation
in the spectrum between proton and carbon peaks. Thus, the acceleration occurs in the
presence of fast electrons, and the peak separation might be due to additional TNSA-
like effect giving an extra boost preferentially to the lighter protons. Similar spectra
were also obtained by Steinke et al [51] at MBI Berlin using circular polarization only.
This suggests that side effects such as the tight focusing of the laser pulse (f/2.5 for
Ref.[51]) cause significant heating also for circular polarization, because of both the non-
negligible longitudinal electric field components and the target deformation which leads
to locally oblique incidence. For even tighter focusing (f/1), using the HERCULES
21 −2
laser at I = 2 × 10 W cm Dollar et al [52] found that finite spot size effects almost
cancel out the differences between linear and circular polarization and are unfavourable
for RPA.
Recent results by Kim et al [53] obtained with the 30 fs PULSER laser at GIST
using ultrathin targets, linear polarization and f/4 focusing with an intensity range
20 −2
I = 0.5 − 3.3 × 10 W cm show a more complex scenario. Non-thermal, peaked
spectra are observed for C ions while the proton spectrum is broad, modulated and
extends up to a cut-off energy E = 45 MeV for the thinnest target (10 nm). The
co
number of accelerated protons appears to be higher by an order of magnitude than those
observed for thicker targets by Ogura et al [8] at a similar cut-off energy. In addition,
I1/2
varying the intensity showed a transition from a E ∝ to E ∝ I at an intermediate
co co
intensity (with the peak energy of carbon spectra showing a similar trend). This trend
(also apparent in the peak energy of C) is similar to that observed by Esirkepov et
al in multi-parametric simulations [49] and attributed to the progressively dominant
role of RPA. For the thinnest target values, however, one would also expect a strong
effect of relativistic transparency, which might account for the broad proton spectra.
Comparison with PIC simulations also suggests that the modulations in the energy
spectrum are due to a transverse instability of the foil target, similarly to previous
measurements on VULCAN [54].
As an overall comment on the above mentioned experiments, the importance of RPA
effects at the highest intensities (or in more generally suitable conditions) is apparent
and the evidence of the “fast” quadratic scaling with fluence is promising. Still, a long
way towards optimization remains. In particular, the non-thermal spectra observed for
thin foils are relatively broad, in contrast to the simple picture of LS-RPA as a thin
plasma bunch moving at a coherent velocity, which would correspond to a perfectly
monoenergetic spectrum. The need for wide laser spots to prevent target bending and

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 11
excessive heating would imply large amounts of laser energy. Many observed features
need to be fully understood, especially the RPA dynamics with multiple species. Such
effects could be also exploited to stabilize the acceleration, and more in general target
engineering might also be pursued to tailor the spectrum (see several references in Ref.[1],
sec.IV.A.2).
3.3. RPA as a route towards relativistic ions
In LS-RPA the conversion efficiency η = 2β /(1 + β ) reaches unity when the sail
LS LS
velocity β → 1. However, the scaling with the pulse fluence is less favourable in
LS
this regime. Assuming again a ≃ ζ at the optimal condition we obtain E(opt) =
0
LS
2 2
(m c a /2) (τ/T ). Based on this estimate the laser fluence required to reach E = m c
e 0 L LS p
8 2
is 1.5 × 10 J cm . The corresponding energy would depend strongly on the possible
requirement of a sufficiently wide spot to minimize effects of target deformation: as an
example, taking a 10 µm diameter would require 120 J energy. The slow rate of energy
(Ωt)1/3
gain in the laboratory frame as E ∼ also represents a possible issue since the
LS
acceleration distance might be large enough that pulse diffraction must be taken into
account.
While these issues are certainly challenging, theory and simulation have identified
possible regimes of high gain LS-RPA in the relativistic ion regime. Using 2D simulations
and analytical modelling Bulanov et al [55] have shown how the target rarefaction might
dynamically reduce the areal density on the axis. This allows a faster energy gain
(Ωt)3/5
E ∼ at the expense of a lower number of accelerated ions, provided that a
LS
transition to transparency (partly prevented by the decrease of laser pulse frequency in
the target frame) does not occur. Tamburini et al [56] have further investigated this
regime with fully 3D simulations, finding that the energy maximum observed in 3D
simulations is higher than in 2D, since the effects of rarefaction are stronger. Exploiting
the computing power of the FERMI supercomputer at CINECA (Bologna, Italy) the
simulations of Ref.[56] have been extended to longer times. Fig.3 a) shows the maximum
(Ωt)3/5
energy as a function of time, which is well fitted by the scaling up to a time of
t = 30T . At later times the growth becomes slower, presumably because of the onset
L
of strong transmission of the pulse through the target. The energy of ≃ 2.6 GeV at
t = 60T is more than six times the prediction of the 1D formula (3) for E . These
L LS
results show that multi.GeV energies might be reached with pulse energies of the order
23 −3
of 1 kJ, combined with pulse durations and focusing suitable to approach the 10 cm
intensity level (in the case of Fig.3 a waist radius of 6λ and a pulse duration of 24 fs
were used). The spatial distribution in Fig.3 b) shows that the most energetic ions are
collimated into a narrow cone.

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 12
a) b)
Figure 3. 3D simulations of LS-RPA. Frame a): maximum ion energy versus time
(in laser cycles). Frame b): distribution in space and energy of ions directed into a
◦
cone with 10 full aperture. The target has an initial thickness ℓ = λ and density
23 −3
n = 64n (= 1.1 × 10 cm for λ = 0.8 µm) corresponding to ζ ≃ 200. The laser
e c
2
pulse has 9T (24 fs) FWHM duration (“sin ” envelope), a = 198 peak amplitude
L 0
22 −2
(I = 8.5 × 10 W cm ), 6λ (4.8 µm) waist radius, and circular polarization.
4. Acceleration in the relativistic transparency regime
While the onset of relativistic transparency in a thin target stops the LS-RPA stage, it
opens up a regime of volumetric interaction with the near-critical density plasma which
may lead to high ion energy. In particular, proton cut-off energies exceeding 100 MeV
have been communicated [57]. Several experiments in the transparent regime have been
performed with TRIDENT at LANL (see e.g. Ref.[58] for a review of results oriented to
fast ignition ICF research). Most of the observation are explained in the context of the
Break-Out Afterburner (BOA) model which is actually a relatively complex mechanism,
involving strong instability stages which lead to strong heating of electrons and coupling
to ions. While scalings with laser and target parameters have probably to be fully
characterized yet, BOA has shown promising results for what concerns cut-off energies
and number of ions. A recent work [59] shows in particular an efficient bulk acceleration
11
of C ions, producing up to 5 × 10 particles with an high efficiency of 6%.
A typical signature of the onset of the transparent regime is that the highest ion
◦
numbers and energies are not detected along the laser axis at some angle (e.g. 10 for
Ref.[59]). This effect is also observed in 3D simulations analogous to that shown in Fig.3
but for linear polarization. In such a case the transmission of the laser pulse is stronger
than for circular polarization and the maximum energy is lower.
5. Collisionless Shock Acceleration
An experiment with a similar set-up to Ref.[42], i.e. using a CO laser and a hydrogen jet
2
target was also performed with the NEPTUNE laser at UCLA (US) [60]. In this case the
laser polarization was linear and the intensity of was four times higher than in Ref.[42].

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 13
7
Very narrow peaks in the proton spectrum were observed up to 22 MeV with ≃ 10
−1 −1 12 −1 −1
protons MeV sr in the peak, in striking contrast with > 10 protons MeV sr at
≃ 1 MeV for Ref.[42] which gives evidence of a different acceleration mechanism.
The UCLA experiment was interpreted on the basis on the Collisionless Shock
Acceleration (CSA) model. The fast heating of electrons and density steepening by the
laser pulse drive collisionless shock waves at the velocity v = Mc (where the sound
s s
)1/2
velocity c = (ZT /Am for a non-relativistic plasma and electrons in Boltzmann
s e p
equilibrium, and M > 1 is the Mach number). These shocks are associated to
ions reflected by the shock front. As far as v is constant the reflected ions form a
s
monoenergetic beam at the velocity 2v . If the shock is sustained by fast electrons
s
2 2
(T = T ) high values of v and of ion energies m (2v ) /2 = 2m v may be reached.
e f s p s p s
Much theoretical and simulation work has been performed to unfold the details of the
acceleration process and in particular to tailor the plasma density profile obtaining a
suitably smooth plasma gradient, with the additional aim to suppress TNSA in favour
of CSA (see [61] and references therein).
Scaling CSA beyond 100 MeV/nucleon will require either the development of CO
2
lasers with higher energy or a suitable set-up with optical lasers, using target at densities
21 −3
around n ≃ 10 cm which is higher than what is commonly achieved with gas jets.
c
Recent experiments were performed at LULI using exploding foil plasmas (pre-heated
by long pulses) which turn underdense at the time of the interaction with a short intense
pulse [62]. With this method, broad proton spectra up to a cut-off energy of 7.1 MeV
9 −1 −1 18 −2
with ≃ 10 protons MeV sr have been obtained with a 8 J, 400 fs, 5 × 10 W cm
laser pulse [63].
A possibly limiting factor in CSA is that high efficiency may be not compatible with
keeping a monoenergetic spectrum. This is because the energy gained by the accelerated
ions is at expense of the shock wave energy, so that the shock velocity decreases. In
turn, the velocity of the reflected ions decreases as well, causing a progressive chirp
of the spectrum towards low energies [64]. To illustrate the basics of the effect and
its dependence on the initial velocity distribution of the background ions, we show in
Fig.4 the results of two 1D PIC simulations with identical parameters but different
initial temperature T . For higher T , a larger number of ions is reflected from the
i i
shock, causing a stronger loading of the shock front which velocity decreases. As a
consequence the peak in the spectrum broadens in time. This effect may explain why
the monoenergetic spectra of Ref.[60] correspond to quite low number of protons. This
is also an issue for PIC simulations because a very low energy tail needs to be resolved,
requiring very high numbers of computational particles.
6. Conclusions
There has been considerable recent progress in laser-driven ion acceleration. In the last
two years the observed energy cut-offs have increased with short pulse, low energy laser
systems reaching several tens on MeV, close to or even exceeding what was obtained

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 14
T = 0.5 keV T = 2.0 keV
i i
Figure 4. One-dimensional PIC simulation of shock acceleration. Results are shown
for two runs with identical parameters but the initial ion temperature T (0.5 and
i
2 keV, respectively). For both simulations snaphshots at three different times (in units
of the laser period T ) are shown. The laser pulse impinges from the left and reaches
L
at t = 0 the plasma boundary at x = 0. The top row shows the profiles of ion density
n and electric field E . The middle row shows the f (x,p ) projection of the ion
i x i x
phase space distribution. The bottom row shows the ion energy spectrum. For higher
T the shock velocity decreases and the spectrum progressively broadens towards lower
i
energies. The laser and plasma parameters are a = 1, τ = 55T , n = 2n . The
0 L e c
density and the electric field are normalized to n and m ωc/e, respectively.
c e
with large petawatt systems. Progress have been also obtained on the side of conversion
efficiency, total number of particles, and energy spread. It might be argued that on
each side the most promising results have been obtained in different experiments with
no acceleration mechanism at present seeming able to combine all desirable qualities.
However, there appears to be room for further optimization, with each mechanism being
ultimately most suitable for a specific application.
Ultrahigh pulse contrast has played a crucial role in experiments with solid targets,
allowing for instance the use of ultrathin foils, and probably has allowed more controlled
conditions and more reproducible observations. Promising results have been also
achieved by the use of structured targets, with ion acceleration also providing an insight
on the peculiar interaction physics. The development of innovative targetry has a crucial
importance also for the perspective of high-repetition rate operation.
The further development of high-power laser systems will allow soon to extend the
present investigations to unexplored regimes. Relevant laser development may not only
involve optical systems with femtosecond pulses but also CO infrared lasers which are
2
of potential interest for radiation pressure and shock acceleration in gas targets.
Significant advances have also been made on the side of modelling of experiments
and understanding of relevant physics. Still, however, several open questions remain
and in several cases theoretical scalings with laser and target parameters are still
uncertain. Further progress on this side is highly desirable, especially in order to provide
reliable predictions on experiments with next-generation laser systems. In particular

|    |    |    |
|:---|:---|:---|
|    |    |    |

|    |    |    |
|:---|:---|:---|
|    |    |    |

| 0   | 1   | 2   |
|:----|:----|:----|
|     |     |     |

| 0   | 1   | 2   |
|:----|:----|:----|
|     |     |     |

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 15
there is a strong need, common to different acceleration mechanisms, for massively
parallel simulations able to perform more realistic investigations, in a three-dimensional
geometry and over large scales of space and time.
Acknowledgments
´
A.M. thanks J. Fuchs (LULI, Ecole Polytechnique, France), K. Zeil (HZDR, Germany),
E. d’Humi`eres (CELIA, France), D. Margarone (ELI-Beamlines, Czech Republich) and
Chul Min Kim (GIST, Korea) for providing additional information and comments on
published and unpublished results. The grating targets data of Fig.2 have been obtained
in an experiment at the SLIC facility (CEA Saclay, France) funded from LASERLAB-
EUROPE (grant agreement no. 284464, EU’s 7FP, proposal n.SLIC001693) and were
analysed by T. Ceccotti and V. Floquet. The contribution of P. Londrillo to ALaDyn
code development and simulations is gratefully acknowledged. Access to FERMI
supercomputer at CINECA was awarded by PRACE via the project “LSAIL”. Support
from EPSRC, grant EP/E035728/1 (LIBRA consortium) and from the Italian Ministry
of University and Research via the FIR project “SULDIS” is acknowledged.
References
[1] Macchi A, Borghesi M, and Passoni M. Ion acceleration by superintense laser-plasma interaction.
Rev. Mod. Phys., 85:751–793, 2013.
[2] Daido H, Nishiuchi M, and Pirozhkov A S. Review of laser-driven ion sources and their
applications. Rep. Prog. Phys., 75:056401, 2012.
[3] Zeil K et al. The scaling of proton energies in ultrashort pulse laser plasma acceleration. New J.
Phys., 12:045015, 2010.
[4] Zeil K et al. Direct observation of prompt pre-thermal laser ion sheath acceleration. Nature
Comm., 3, 2012.
[5] Neely D et al. Enhanced proton beams from ultrathin targets driven by high contrast laser pulses.
Appl. Phys. Lett., 89:021502, 2006.
[6] Choi I W et al. Simultaneous generation of ions and high-order harmonics from thin conjugated
polymer foil irradiated with ultrahigh contrast laser. Appl. Phys. Lett., 99:181501, 2011.
[7] Margarone D et al. Laser-driven proton acceleration enhancement by nanostructured foils. Phys.
Rev. Lett., 109:234801, 2012.
[8] Ogura K et al. Proton acceleration to 40 MeV using a high intensity, high contrast optical
parametric chirped-pulse amplification/ti:sapphire hybrid laser system. Opt. Lett., 37:2868–
2870, 2012.
21 −2
[9] Dollar F et al. High contrast ion acceleration at intensities exceeding 10 W cm . Phys. Plasmas,
20:056703, 2013.
[10] Fuchs J et al. Laser-driven proton scaling laws and new paths towards energy increase. Nature
Phys., 2:48, 2006.
[11] Borghesi M et al. Laser-driven proton acceleration: source optimization and radiographic
applications. Plasma Phys. Contr. Fusion, 50:124040, 2008.
[12] Passoni M, Bertagna L, and Zani A. Target normal sheath acceleration: theory, comparison with
experiments and future perspectives. New J. Phys., 12:045012, 2010.
[13] Perego C, Zani A, Batani D, and Passoni M. Extensive comparison among target normal sheath
acceleration theoretical models. Nucl. Inst. Meth. Phys. Res. A, 653:89 – 93, 2011.

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 16
[14] Kiefer T, Schlegel T, and Kaluza M C. Plasma expansion into vacuum assuming a steplike electron
energy distribution. Phys. Rev. E, 87:043110, 2013.
[15] Prasad R et al. Fast ion acceleration from thin foils irradiated by ultra-high intensity, ultra-high
contrast laser pulses. Appl. Phys. Lett., 99:121504, 2011.
[16] Schmitz H. Target normal sheath acceleration sheath fields for arbitrary electron energy
distribution. Phys. Plasmas, 19:083115, 2012.
[17] Sherlock M. Universal scaling of the electron distribution function in one-dimensional simulations
of relativistic laser-plasma interactions. Phys. Plasmas, 16:103101, 2009.
[18] d’Humi`eres E et al. Optimization of laser-target interaction for proton acceleration. Phys.
Plasmas, 20:023103, 2013.
[19] Passoni M, Perego C, Sgattoni A, and Batani D. Advances in target normal sheath acceleration
theory. Phys. Plasmas, 20(6):060701, 2013.
[20] Diaw A and Mora P. Thin-foil expansion into a vacuum with a two-temperature electron
distribution function. Phys. Rev. E, 86:026403, 2012.
[21] Veltcheva M et al. Brunel-dominated proton acceleration with a few-cycle laser pulse. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 108:075004, 2012.
[22] Sgattoni A, Londrillo P, Macchi A, and Passoni M. Laser ion acceleration using a solid target
coupled with a low-density layer. Phys. Rev. E, 85:036405, 2012.
[23] Floquet V et al. Micro-sphere layered targets efficiency in laser driven proton acceleration.
submitted for publication, 2013.
[24] Sgattoni A et al. Enhanced laser coupling and proton acceleration in grating targets by surface
wave excitation in the relativistic regime. In 40th EPS Conference on Plasma Physics, 2013.
[25] Ceccotti T et al. Evidence of resonant surface wave excitation in the relativistic regime through
measurements of proton acceleration from grating targets. submitted for publication.
[26] Zigler A et al. Enhanced proton acceleration by an ultrashort laser interaction with structured
dynamic plasma targets. Phys. Rev. Lett., 110:215004, 2013.
[27] Gaillard S A et al. Increased laser-accelerated proton energies via direct laser-light-pressure
acceleration of electrons in microcone targets. Phys. Plasmas, 18:056710, 2011.
[28] Snavely R A et al. Intense high-energy proton beams from petawatt-laser irradiation of solids.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 85:2945–2948, 2000.
[29] Robson L et al. Scaling of proton acceleration driven by petawatt-laser-plasmainteractions. Nature
Phys., 3:58–62, 2007.
[30] Kluge T et al. High proton energies from cone targets: electron acceleration mechanisms. New
J. Phys., 14:023038, 2012.
[31] Zani A, Dellasega D, Russo V, and Passoni M. Ultra-low density carbon foams produced by pulsed
laser deposition. Carbon, 56:358 – 365, 2013.
[32] Prencipe I et al. Ultra-intense laser-driven ion acceleration with multi-layered targets. In 40th
EPS Conference on Plasma Physics, 2013.
[33] Bartal T et al. Focusing of short-pulse high-intensity laser-accelerated proton beams. Nature
Phys., 8:139–142, 2012.
[34] Chen S N et al. Focusing dynamics of high-energy density, laser-driven ion beams. Phys. Rev.
Lett., 108:055001, 2012.
[35] Robinson A P L et al. Spectral modification of laser-accelerated proton beams by self-generated
magnetic fields. New J. Phys., 11:083018, 2009.
[36] Sarri G et al. Dynamics of self-generated, large amplitude magnetic fields following high-intensity
laser matter interaction. Phys. Rev. Lett., 109:205002, 2012.
[37] Macchi A. Toy model of the ”fountain effect” for magnetic field generation in intense laser-solid
interactions. ArXiv e-prints, 2012. arXiv:1202.0389.
[38] Fuchs J et al. Tunable achromatic focusing optics for high-current laser-accelerated proton beams.
In 1st European Advanced Accelerator Concepts Workshop, 2013.
[39] Hegelich B M et al. Laser acceleration of quasi-monoenergetic MeV ion beams. Nature, 439:441,

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 17
2006.
[40] Schwoerer H et al. Laser-plasma acceleration of quasi-monoenergetic protons from microstructured
targets. Nature, 439:445, 2006.
[41] Levy M C, Wilks S C, and Baring M G. Accelerating piston action and plasma heating in high-
energy density laser plasma interactions. High Energy Density Physics, 9:198 – 203, 2013.
[42] Palmer C A J et al. Monoenergetic proton beams accelerated by a radiation pressure driven shock.
Phys. Rev. Lett., 106:014801, 2011.
[43] Macchi A and Benedetti C. Ion acceleration by radiation pressure in thin and thick targets. Nucl.
Inst. Meth. Phys. Res. A, 620:41 – 45, 2010.
[44] Robinson A P L. Production of high energy protons with hole-boring radiation pressure
acceleration. Phys. Plasmas, 18:056701, 2011.
[45] Robinson A P L, Trines R M G M, Dover N P, and Najmudin Z. Hole-boring radiation pressure
acceleration as a basis for producing high-energy proton bunches. Plasma Phys. Contr. Fusion,
54:115001, 2012.
[46] Macchi A, Veghini S, and Pegoraro F. “Light Sail” acceleration reexamined. Phys. Rev. Lett.,
103:085003, 2009.
[47] Macchi A, Veghini S, Liseykina T V, and Pegoraro F. Radiation pressure acceleration of ultrathin
foils. New J. Phys., 12:045013, 2010.
[48] Q. L. Dong, Z.-M. Sheng, M. Y. Yu, and J. Zhang. Optimization of ion acceleration in the
interaction of intense femtosecond laser pulses with ultrathin foils. Phys. Rev. E, 68:026408,
Aug 2003.
[49] Esirkepov T, Yamagiwa M, and Tajima T. Laser ion-acceleration scaling laws seen in
multiparametric particle-in-cell simulations. Phys. Rev. Lett., 96:105001, 2006.
[50] Aurand B et al. Radiation pressure-assisted acceleration of ions using multi-component foils in
high-intensity laser-matter interactions. New J. Phys., 15:033031, 2013.
[51] Steinke S et al. Stable laser-ion acceleration in the light sail regime. Phys. Rev. ST Accel. Beams,
16:011303, 2013.
[52] Dollar F et al. Finite spot effects on radiation pressure acceleration from intense high-contrast
laser interactions with thin targets. Phys. Rev. Lett., 108:175005, 2012.
[53] Jong Kim I et al. Towards radiation pressure acceleration of protons using linearly polarized
ultrashort petawatt laser pulses. ArXiv e-prints, 2013. arXiv:1304.0333.
[54] Palmer C A J et al. Rayleigh-Taylor instability of an ultrathin foil accelerated by the radiation
pressure of an intense laser. Phys. Rev. Lett., 108:225002, 2012.
[55] Bulanov S V et al. Unlimited ion acceleration by radiation pressure. Phys. Rev. Lett., 104:135003,
2010.
[56] Tamburini M, Liseykina T V, Pegoraro F, and Macchi A. Radiation-pressure-dominant
acceleration: Polarization and radiation reaction effects and energy increase in three-dimensional
simulations. Phys. Rev. E, 85:016407, 2012.
[57] Hegelich B M. Towards extreme field physics: Relativistic optics and particle acceleration in the
transparent-overdense regime. Bull. Am. Phys. Soc., 56:322 (UI2.00004), 2011.
[58] Hegelich B M et al. Experimental demonstration of particle energy, conversion efficiency and
spectral shape required for ion-based fast ignition. Nucl. Fusion, 51:083011, 2011.
[59] Jung D et al. Efficient carbon ion beam generation from laser-driven volume acceleration. New
J. Phys., 15:023007, 2013.
[60] Haberberger D et al. Collisionless shocks in laser-produced plasma generate monoenergetic high-
energy proton beams. Nature Phys., 8:95–99, 2012.
[61] Fiuza F et al. Ion acceleration from laser-driven electrostatic shocks. Phys. Plasmas, 20:056304,
2013.
[62] d’Humi´eres E et al. Investigation of high intensity laser proton acceleration with underdense
targets. J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 244:042023, 2010.
[63] Gauthier M et al. Investigation of efficient shock acceleration of ions using high energy lasers

Advanced strategies for ion acceleration using high power lasers 18
propagating in low density targets. In 39th EPS Conference on Plasma Physics, volume 36F of
Europhysics Conference Abstracts, page O2.203, 2012.
[64] Macchi A, Singh Nindrayog A, and Pegoraro F. Solitary versus shock wave acceleration in laser-
plasma interactions. Phys. Rev. E, 85:046402, 2012.