Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
Proportion of Joint Pain Patients Seeking Physical 
Therapy in Quetta City  
 
Rubina Ahmed1,Zain Karim2, Muhammad Asghar Khan3, Arsalan khan4, Pawan 
kumar5, Muhammad Younas6  
1,2,3,4,5,6Research Scholar, University of Balouchistan, Quetta, Pakistan.  
 
Emails: srkhn6565@gmail.com, zainkarim86@yahoo.com, m.asgharkakar0341@gmail.com, 
arslankhandaavi@gmail.com, khuranapawan3@gmail.com, younas6710@gmail.com 
 
*Corresponding Author 
 
Received: 00-00-2023; Accepted: 00-00-2023; Published: 00-00-2023 
DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.10446012 
 
ABSTRACT 
Physical therapy is one of the most emerging fields in the world due to its different and reliable and 
beneficiary mode of treatments. According to the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA), 
physical therapists are trained and licensed movement experts. They can diagnose and treat a range 
of injuries, disabilities, and health conditions. Physical therapists aim to improve a person’s range of 
movement and quality of life and prevent further injury or disability. Pakistan has a disability rate of 
(2.65%) with a total of around 5.035 million disabled people. Physical therapy as a profession started 
in 1956 at the Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Centre with a 2-year diploma, later on 4 years bachelors’ 
program  was  also  started.  In  2008,  Doctor  of  Physical  Therapy  program  was  initiated.  The 
representative body "Pakistan Physical Therapy Association" was also established in 2008 which 
then joined the World Confederation for Physical Therapy in 2011. There is plenty of work being 
done in the field and it has seen a rapid growth in the past decade compared to the last 50 years. 
Currently, there are 69 institutions in Pakistan offering various physical therapy courses.   
 
Awareness of physical therapy in Pakistan is one of the major issues that is currently on the top. 
Thus, the current study was conducted with the aim to evaluate the proportion of joint pain patients 
seeking physical therapy in Quetta city. This was a cross-sectional study conducted on general 
population of Quetta city. An interview Schedule of consisting of 3 parts (Socio-demographic, Pain 
history, Treatment history) and 20 questions were asked from the people who are currently having 
joint pain, about 347 interviewees participated in this study after which the data was analyzed by 
Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS)   
  
version 26. A p-value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. Among the [N=347] participants 
(48.4%) were male and (51.6%) were female. About (12.1%) of the participants belong to the age 
group (59-78) and were all aware about the physical therapy. [N=105] participants belong to the 
postgraduate  education  group,  and  about  (98%)  were  aware  about  physical  therapy.  [N=130] 
participants  were  currently  employed  and  (94.6%)  were  aware  about  physical  therapy.  Among 
[N=347]  of  total  participants  (89.6%)  were  aware  about  physical  therapy.  When  it  comes  to 
consultation of physical therapy only [N=135] (38.9%) of [N=347] participants have consulted PT 
as mode of treatment. Among those [N=135] participants [N=42] of them belong to age group (59-
78)  and  only  (76.2%)  among  them  consulted  physical  therapist,  with  education  of  FA/FSC 
participants  were  [N=37]  and  among  them  (75.7%)  consulted  PT’s  and  (68.5%)  of  employed 
participants and participants belonging to Punjabi ethnicity (74.5%) have consulted a PT’s. education 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  1 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

| 0   | 1                            | 2   |
|:----|:-----------------------------|:----|
|     | DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.10446012 |     |

| ABSTRACT   | None                                                                                                     | None   |
|:-----------|:---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:-------|
|            | Physical therapy is one of the most emerging fields in the world due to its different and reliable and   |        |
|            | beneficiary mode of treatments. According to the American Physical Therapy Association (APTA),           |        |
|            | physical therapists are trained and licensed movement experts. They can diagnose and treat a range       |        |
|            | of injuries, disabilities, and health conditions. Physical therapists aim to improve a person’s range of |        |
|            | movement and quality of life and prevent further injury or disability. Pakistan has a disability rate of |        |
|            | (2.65%) with a total of around 5.035 million disabled people. Physical therapy as a profession started   |        |
|            | in 1956 at the Jinnah Postgraduate Medical Centre with a 2-year diploma, later on 4 years bachelors’     |        |
|            | program was also started. In 2008, Doctor of Physical Therapy program was initiated. The                 |        |
|            | representative body "Pakistan Physical Therapy Association" was also established in 2008 which           |        |
|            | then joined the World Confederation for Physical Therapy in 2011. There is plenty of work being          |        |
|            | done in the field and it has seen a rapid growth in the past decade compared to the last 50 years.       |        |
|            | Currently, there are 69 institutions in Pakistan offering various physical therapy courses.              |        |
|            |                                                                                                          |        |
|            | Awareness of physical therapy in Pakistan is one of the major issues that is currently on the top.       |        |
|            | Thus, the current study was conducted with the aim to evaluate the proportion of joint pain patients     |        |
|            | seeking physical therapy in Quetta city. This was a cross-sectional study conducted on general           |        |
|            | population of Quetta city. An interview Schedule of consisting of 3 parts (Socio-demographic, Pain       |        |
|            | history, Treatment history) and 20 questions were asked from the people who are currently having         |        |
|            | joint pain, about 347 interviewees participated in this study after which the data was analyzed by       |        |
|            | Statistical Package for Social Sciences (SPSS)                                                           |        |
|            |                                                                                                          |        |
|            | version 26. A p-value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. Among the [N=347] participants     |        |
|            | (48.4%) were male and (51.6%) were female. About (12.1%) of the participants belong to the age           |        |
|            | group (59-78) and were all aware about the physical therapy. [N=105] participants belong to the          |        |
|            | postgraduate education group, and about (98%) were aware about physical therapy. [N=130]                 |        |
|            | participants were currently employed and (94.6%) were aware about physical therapy. Among                |        |
|            | [N=347] of total participants (89.6%) were aware about physical therapy. When it comes to                |        |
|            | consultation of physical therapy only [N=135] (38.9%) of [N=347] participants have consulted PT          |        |
|            | as mode of treatment. Among those [N=135] participants [N=42] of them belong to age group (59-           |        |
|            | 78) and only (76.2%) among them consulted physical therapist, with education of FA/FSC                   |        |
|            | participants were [N=37] and among them (75.7%) consulted PT’s and (68.5%) of employed                   |        |
|            | participants and participants belonging to Punjabi ethnicity (74.5%) have consulted a PT’s. education    |        |

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
showing great significance (p-value=0.000), followed by age   (p-value=0.013) and employment (p-
value=0.018) when associated with Awareness. Meanwhile,  ethnicity showing great significance (p-
value=0.002),  followed  by  education  (p-value=0.005),  followed  by  age  (p-value=0.029)  and 
employment (pvalue=0.029)  when associated with Consultation of PT. in conclusion the awareness 
was high among study participants but consultation of PT was moderately lower than expected and 
to overcome that screening awareness program about Physical therapy benefits must be conducted 
around Balochistan especially in Quetta so that people can take advantage of such highly reliable and 
emerging profession around the globe.  
 
Keywords: Physical Therapy, Joint Pain, Doctor of Physical Therapy, Physically Handicapped 
 
Cite as: First Author, Second Author (Year). Type the Research Title. Mader e Milat International 
Journal of Nursing and Allied Sciences, 1(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000696 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Physical therapy also known as “Physiotherapy” is a profession in which a person who guide’s or treats  
“Physiotherapist” a patient through exercises and promotes life and maintains the health of a patient 
without medication and surgical interventions. The physical therapy management includes the exercises, 
manual therapy, manipulation techniques, traction devices, and modalities such as TENS, hot pack (heat 
therapy) and cold pack (cryotherapy), radiations, and sound waves. For assistance a Physiotherapist can 
use aiding devices also known as prosthetics and orthotics. In Pakistan Physical Therapy was introduced 
in 1956 by Federal Government and in early 20th century, Physiotherapy treatment of many health-
related issues started in Quetta, but there was no institute in whole of Baluchistan offering Doctor of 
Physical Therapy Degree but soon in 2013, University of Balochistan started 05 years program of 
“Doctor of Physical Therapy” in Quetta. 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Physical Therapy 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  2 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

|    | showing great significance (p-value=0.000), followed by age (p-value=0.013) and employment (p-        |    |
|:---|:------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---|
|    | value=0.018) when associated with Awareness. Meanwhile, ethnicity showing great significance (p-      |    |
|    | value=0.002), followed by education (p-value=0.005), followed by age (p-value=0.029) and              |    |
|    | employment (pvalue=0.029) when associated with Consultation of PT. in conclusion the awareness        |    |
|    | was high among study participants but consultation of PT was moderately lower than expected and       |    |
|    | to overcome that screening awareness program about Physical therapy benefits must be conducted        |    |
|    | around Balochistan especially in Quetta so that people can take advantage of such highly reliable and |    |
|    | emerging profession around the globe.                                                                 |    |

|    | Cite as: First Author, Second Author (Year). Type the Research Title. Mader e Milat International   |    |
|:---|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|:---|
|    | Journal of Nursing and Allied Sciences, 1(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000696              |    |

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
Background 
Wars, epidemic, accidents, the need the physically handicapped, and increased social demand for 
integration of people with disabilities into society have all shaped the development of physical therapy 
as  an  essential  component  of  the  health  care.  Federal  legislation  and  medical  advance  also  have 
contributed to the evolution of the profession.  
 
The first decades of the twentieth century were exciting times in the development of physical therapy 
with many first occurring: Pennsylvania become the first state of license PTs; the first physical therapy 
textbook and first journal devoted to physical therapy were published and first baccalaureate program 
for PT’s was established. Aftermath of world war I as the United States developed programs to provide 
care  for  injured  soldiers  workers  and  children  devastated  by  the  effect  of  infantile  paralysis  or 
poliomyelitis. 
 
Figure 2: Physical Therapy Rehabilitation in WWI 
 
In  1956  the  American  physiotherapy association (formerly  the  AWPTA)  changes  its  name to the 
American physical therapy association and become more structurally complex through the creation of 
special interest groups and sections.  
 
Physical therapy could not have evolved into the profession it is today without the vision of its pioneers. 
The history of physical therapy in the United States begins with Marry McMillan. Who founded the 
American women’s physiotherapy Association and was elected its first president in 1921, Although 
American born, McMillan lived in Europe in her early years, She completed studies at Liverpool 
University and did graduate work in physical culture and corrective exercises, which include Swedish 
gymnastic and dynamics of scoliosis. She then worked in the Hospitals in England, where she treated 
victims of industrial accidents, until she returned to the United States in 1915. McMillan becomes 
director of massage and medical gymnastic at the Children’s Hospital in Portland, Maine.  
 
The year 1940 to 1969 we marked by the passage of legislation supporting the training of allied health 
personnel, the building of the hospitals, and creation of Medicare and Medicaid. Soldiers injured in the 
World War 2 and Korea and Vietnam required the attention of PTs in the military and in Veterans 
Administration hospitals.  
 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  3 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
In  2004  the  priority  Goals  of  American  Physical  Therapy  Association  were  established.  Such  as 
Academic  and  clinical  education  prepares  Doctor  of  Physical  Therapy  who  are  autonomous 
practitioners. Research advance the science of physical therapy and furthers the evidence-based practice 
of the PT. PTs and PTAs are committed to meeting the health need of patients/clients and society 
through ethical behavior, continued competence, and advocacy for the profession.  
 
The goals are based upon the APTA vision statement for physical therapy 2020 (vision 2020) developed 
by the Association in 2020. The goal encompasses the association’s major priorities as it moves toward 
realization of the ideals set forth in vision 2020. The board committed to these goals as the foundation 
from which the lead the Association.  
 
Physical  therapy  today:  The  APTA  performed  well  in  fulfilling  the  functional  of  a  professional 
organization and meeting its obligation to its members.  Through its political action and lobbying efforts, 
it has protected the economic and social welfare of its members, particularly in the area of health care 
financing  legislation.  The  influence  of  the  APTA  on  the  licensure  requirements  and  on  ethical, 
educational and research standards directly affects the performance of each individual practitioner’s 
professional duties.  
 
(Professionalism in Physical Therapy History, practice & Development)  
(Laura Lee, Swisher Catherine G. Page)   
 
 
Types of Joints  
Shoulder Girdle Complex  
There are three synovial joints (glenohumeral, acromioclavicular, sternoclavicular) and two functional 
articulations (scapulothoracic, supra-humeral) that make up the shoulder girdle complex.   
 
Glenohumeral Joint  
The glen humeral joint is an incongruous, ball-and socket (spheroidal) triaxle joint with a lax joint 
capsule. It is supported by the tendons of the rotator cuff and the glen humeral (superior, middle, inferior) 
and coracohumeral ligaments. The concave bony partner, the glenoid fossa, is located on the superior-
lateral margin of the scapula. It faces anteriorly, laterally, and upward, which provides some stability 
to the joint. A fibro cartilaginous lip, the glenoid labrum, deepens the fossa for greater congruity and 
serves as the attachment site for the capsule. The convex bony partner is the head of the homers. Only 
a small portion of the head comes in contact with the fossa at any one time, allowing for considerable 
humeral movement and potential instability. 
 
Acromioclavicular Joint   
The acromioclavicular joint is a plane, triaxial joint that may or may not have a disk. The weak capsule 
is reinforced by the superior and inferior AC ligaments. The convex bony partner is a facet on the lateral 
end of the clavicle. The concave bony partner is a facet on the acromion of the scapula  
  
Sternoclavicular Joint   
The sternoclavicular joint is an incongruent, triaxial, saddle-shaped joint with a disk. The joint is 
supported  by  the  anterior  and  posterior  SC  ligaments  and  the  interclavicular  and  costoclavicular 
ligaments. The medial end of the clavicle is convex superior to inferior and concave anterior to posterior. 
The joint disk attaches to the upper end. The superior-lateral portion of the manubrium and first costal 
cartilage is concave superior to inferior and convex anterior to posterior.  
(Book: Therapeutic Exercise Foundations and Techniques, Chapter 17) 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  4 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Joints of Shoulder Girdle 
Joints of the Wrist  
 The wrist joint is multi-articular and is made up of two compound joints. It is biaxial, allowing flexion 
(volar flexion), extension (dorsi-flexion), radial deviation (abduction), and ulnar deviation (adduction). 
Stability is provided by numerous ligaments: the ulnar and radial collateral, the dorsal and volar 
(palmar) radio-carpal, the ulno-carpal, and the intercarpal.  
 
Radio-carpal Joint   
The radio-carpal joint is enclosed in a loose but strong capsule that is reinforced by the ligaments 
shared with the mid-carpal joint. The biconcave articulating surface is the distal end of the radius and 
radioulnar  disk  (discus  articularis);  it  is  angled  slightly  volar-ward  and  ulnar-ward.  The  biconvex 
articulating surface is the combined proximal surface of the scaphoid, lunate, and triquetrum. The 
triquetrum primarily articulates with the disk. These three carpals are bound together with numerous 
interosseous ligaments.  
 
Mid-Carpal Joint   
The mid-carpal joint is a compound joint between the two rows of carpals. It has a capsule that is also 
continuous with the intercarpal articulations. The combined distal surfaces of the scaphoid, lunate, 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  5 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
and triquetrum articulate with the combined proximal surfaces of the trapezium, trapezoid, capitate, 
and hamate  
(Book: Therapeutic Exercise Foundations and Technique, Chapter 19)  
 
 
 
Figure 4: Joints of Wrist   
Knee Complex  
A lax joint capsule encloses two articulations: the tibio-femoral and the patellafemoral joints. Recesses 
from the capsule form the supra-patellar, sub-popliteal, and gastrocnemius bursas. Folds or thickenings 
in  the  synovium  persist  from  embryologic  tissue  in  up  to  60%  of  individuals  and  may  become 
symptomatic with micro-trauma or macro-trauma.  
 
Tibio-femoral Joint  
The knee joint is a biaxial, modified hinge joint with two interposed menisci supported by ligaments 
and muscles. Antero-posterior stability is provided by the cruciate ligaments; medio-lateral stability is 
provided by the medial (tibial) and lateral (fibular) collateral ligaments, respectively the convex bony 
partner is composed of two asymmetrical condyles on the distal end of the femur. The medial condyle 
is longer than the lateral condyle, which contributes to the locking mechanism at the knee. The concave 
bony partner is composed of two tibial plateaus on the proximal tibia with their respective fibro-
cartilaginous menisci. The medial plateau is larger than the lateral plateau. The menisci improve the 
congruency of the articulating surfaces. They are connected to the tibial condyles and capsule by the 
coronary ligaments, to each other by the transverse ligament, and to the patella via the patellameniscal 
ligaments. The medial meniscus is firmly attached to the joint capsule as well as to the medial collateral 
ligament, anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments, and semi-membranous muscle. The lateral meniscus 
attaches to the posterior cruciate ligament and the tendon of the popliteus muscle through capsular 
connections. Because of the relatively secure attachment of the medial meniscus compared to the lateral 
meniscus, it has a greater chance of sustaining a tear when there is a lateral blow to the knee 
 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  6 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
 
 
Figure 5: Tibiofemoral Joint
Patello-Femoral Joint   
The patella is a sesamoid bone in the quadriceps tendon. It articulates with the intercondylar (trochlear) 
groove on the anterior aspect of the distal portion of the femur. Its articulating surface is covered with 
smooth hyaline cartilage. The patella is embedded in the anterior portion of the joint capsule and is 
connected to the tibia by the ligamentum patellae. Many bursas surround the patella and the foot (talus).  
(Book: Therapeutic Exercise Foundations and Techniques, Chapter 21)  
  
Figure 6: Patellofemoral Joint   
 
 
Ankle Joint  
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  7 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
The ankle joint (or talocrural joint) is a synovial joint located in the lower limb.  
 
It is formed by the bones of the leg (tibia and fibula).  
 
Functionally, it is a hinge type joint, permitting dorsi flexion and plantar flexion of the foot. The ankle 
joint is formed by three bones; the tibia and fibula of the leg, and the talus of the foot.  
 
The tibia and fibula are bound together by strong tibio-fibular ligaments. Together, they form a bracket 
shaped socket, covered in hyaline cartilage. This socket is known as a mortise.  
 
The body of the talus fits snugly into the mortise formed by the bones of the leg. The articulating part 
of the talus is wedge shaped – it is broad anteriorly and narrow posteriorly:  
 
Dorsiflexion – the anterior part of the talus is held in the mortise, and the joint is more stable.  
 
Plantarflexion – the posterior part of the talus is held in the mortise, and the joint is less stable.   
     
 
Figure 7:  Ankle Joint    
Hip Joint  
The  hip  is  a  ball-and-socket  (spheroidal)  triaxial  joint  made  up  of  the  head  of  the  femur  and 
acetabulum of  the  pelvis.  It  is  supported  by  a  strong  articular  capsule  that  is  reinforced  by  the 
iliofemoral, pubofemoral, and ischial-femoral ligaments. The two hip joints are linked to each other 
through the bony pelvis and to the vertebral column through the sacroiliac and lumbosacral joints.  
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  8 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
(Book: Therapeutic Exercise Foundations and Techniques, Chapter 20)  
  
 
Figure 9: Hip Joint 
     
Spine (back)  
A healthy spine has three natural curves that make an S-shape. These curves absorb shocks to your 
body and protect your spine from injury. Many different parts make up your spine:  
 
Vertebrae 
The spine has 33 stacked vertebrae (small bones) that form the spinal canal. The spinal canal is a tunnel 
that houses the spinal cord and nerves, protecting them from injury. Most vertebrae move to allow for 
a range of motion. The lowest vertebrae (sacrum and coccyx) are fused together and don’t move.  
 
 
 
Facet Joints 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  9 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
These spinal joints have cartilage (a slippery connective tissue) that allows vertebrae to slide against 
each other. Facet joints let you twist and turn, and they provide flexibility and stability. These joints 
can develop arthritis and cause back pain or neck pain.  
 
Intervertebral Disks 
These flat, round cushions sit between the vertebrae and act as the spine’s shock absorbers. Each disk 
has a soft, gel-like center (the nucleus pulposus) surrounded by a flexible outer ring (the annulus). 
Intervertebral disks are under constant pressure. A herniated disk can tear, allowing some of the nucleus’ 
gel substance to leak out. Herniated disks (also called bulging, slipped or ruptured disks) can be painful.  
 
Spinal Cord and Nerves 
The spinal cord is a column of nerves that travels through the spinal canal. The cord extends from the 
skull to the lower back. Thirty-one pairs of nerves branch out through vertebral openings (the neural 
foramen). These nerves carry messages between the brain and muscles.  
 
Soft Tissues 
Ligaments connect the vertebrae to hold the spine in position. Muscles support the back and help you 
move. Tendons connect muscles to bone and aid movement.  
   
Figure 10: Spine 
Joint Pain  
Joint pain is very common in older people because in older age joint pain is start because of knee 
osteoarthritis. Joint pain is start because of injury and overuse of joint Physical therapy and 
supportive aids help to maintain or reduce the joint pain.  
 
Shoulder Joint Pain  
Shoulder pain is any pain in the shoulder or around the shoulder. Shoulder pain cause because of 
rotator cuff impingement, Arthritis, bony spur formation, bursitis, fracture, shoulder dislocation, tear 
of rotator cuff tendon. And poor posture cause the shoulder joint pain  
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  10 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
 
Wrist Joint Pain  
Wrist pain is cause because of repetitive stresses, arthritis, overuse of joint, sprain, strain, fracture, and 
carpal tunnel syndrome.  
Wrist joint injuries are common in support such as football, tennis and bowling and diabetes also cause 
the wrist joint pain.  
 
Knee Joint Pain  
Knee pain may be the result of injury to the ligaments, cartilage, meniscus. pain may be cause because 
of knee arthritis, fracture, bursitis, and infection of joint. Knee become swell, red, stiff and warmth 
because of pain. Other risk factor which cause the joint pain such as over-weight, weak muscle, sport 
injuries and lack of muscle flexibility.  
 
Ankle Joint Pain  
Ankle pain is cause because of injury, wear and tear, sprain, strain, fracture, tendinitis, arthritis, and 
bursitis of ankle joint problem cause the pain, swelling and redness. Physiotherapy and rest is reducing 
the ankle pain.  
 
Hip Joint Pain  
Hip  pain  is  cause  because  of  injury,  fracture,  bursitis,  arthritis,  sprain,  tendinitis,  labral  tear, 
osteoporosis, cancer, and osteomyelitis. These problems cause the swelling, redness, and pain.   
 
Back Pain  
Back pain is cause because of arthritis, strain, muscle spasm, injury, fracture, bulging disk, sciatica, and 
ruptured disks.   
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Physiotherapy is a vast and rapidly growing area in the field of medical sciences . Physiotherapy 
treatment  has  high  recovery  rates  with  lowest  side  effects  .Our  research  was  basically  based  on 
awareness about Physiotherapy within Quetta, Baluchistan and we tried to calculate the percentage of 
how many people among general population are seeking physiotherapy by taking in consideration the 
general population our aim was to cover all the age groups and to see the overall awareness among 
individuals. We focused on the term “JOINT PAIN” because it’s the most common problem faced by 
people of all age groups and most of the patients that consult a physiotherapist,  do so due to joint pain. 
In one of the Questions of our research interview schedule we asked general people about the cost of 
Physiotherapy treatment . In most of the cases the cost is inversely proportional to awareness, the less 
the cost is the more will be the number of people utilizing the services. We tried our best to cover all 
categories  of  population  which  included  students,  employed  population,  unemployed  population, 
people from all cultures within Baluchistan and people from urban as well as rural areas .Our goal was 
to target every possible aspect of general population around us.   
 
Study  was  conducted  by  Fa  maruf,  Ec  ekediegwu,  Ao  akinpelu,  Mj  nwankwo  in  Department  of 
Physiotherapy, College of Medicine, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria in year 2012. This study 
examined the awareness, attitude, belief, and utilization of physiotherapy services (PS) in a Nigerian 
sample. This was a crosssectional survey involving 885 adult residents of Nnewi in south-eastern 
Nigeria.  
 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  11 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
Awareness of physiotherapy existence was high (61.8%). Many of the respondents (29.7%) got their 
information  about  physiotherapy  from  hospitals  and  20.8%  thought  that  government  should  be 
responsible for creating awareness about physiotherapy. The majority of respondents (89.6%) felt they 
needed to know more about physiotherapy while 56% felt their current knowledge about physiotherapy 
was enough to advise others on PS. Almost all the participants (93%) thought that physiotherapy should 
be in all hospitals, while 41.3% and 35.6% respectively reported physiotherapy to be always and 
sometimes effective. Of those who had received physiotherapy, 22.7% and 20.2% felt satisfied and 
impressed respectively.  
 
A study was published on July 2014 regarding to Awareness in Physiotherapy among High School 
Students by Thusharika D. Dissanayaka, Shayama Banneheka Department of Physiotherapy, Faculty 
of Allied Health Sciences, University of Peradeniya, Sri Lanka . The aim of this study was to assess the 
level  of  awareness  about  physiotherapy  among  advanced  level  science  students  in  the  Kandy 
educational  zone  and  to  assess  the  sources  form  which  they  could  obtain  information  regarding 
physiotherapy. A structured survey consisting of three parts was used, and eight hundred and fifteen 
high school level Sinhala medium science students from nine schools in Kandy zone in Sri Lanka were 
approached. Of these, seven hundred and seventy six completed questionnaires were returned (95% 
response rate). A vast majority of student were unaware about the uses of physiotherapy in other disease 
conditions than sports injuries , mainly in chest conditions like bronchitis (80%). The overall awareness 
about physiotherapy  was approximately 30.5%. .The students were not much aware of physiotherapy 
as a career, treatment method and its applications in disease conditions other than sports  injuries. 
Television,  internet,  and  newspapers/magazine  were  the  most  cited  source  of  information  for 
physiotherapy.  
 
A study was published in 2017 on the topic physiotherapy awareness in medical and non-medical 
population: a social media survey by Devanshi Doshi  , Mariyah Jiandani  , Rucha Gadgil  , Neha Shetty 
in india. The purpose of this study was to find level of awareness of Physiotherapy among medical 
professionals and general population. Its result was 103 people from medical and 153 people from 
general population filled the questionnaire.90% of medical professional and 78% of general population 
knew  physiotherapy  field.  Both  groups  were  aware  about  specialties  of  Physiotherapy.  However, 
awareness was less in specialty such as Cardiovascular and pulmonary conditions, Plastic surgery, 
Oncology and Post-surgery physiotherapy in both the populations.  
  
According to study published on March 2019 about Physiotherapy Awareness Among Community 
Health workers by Dr. Fouzia Hussain, Dr. Hajra Ameer Shaikh, Dr.  
Muhammad Saad Khan, Dr. Saffa Ibrahim Study was conducted from August 2017 to November 2017 
on CHWs. study concluded that there is a very little awareness regarding to physiotherapy among 
CHWs and there is almost no way of awareness to provide knowledge related to physiotherapy. Provide 
enough education about physiotherapy during their treatment time period aware all CHWs by contacting 
personally and awareness through media and accessibility for healthcare. Deliver provide education 
about physiotherapy necessity in gynecological and pediatric conditions. Call workers to seminars and 
arrange workshops for CHWs to provide information regarding physiotherapy. Study was held on 
educated people.  
  
An Article published was on June 30 2019 on awareness of physiotherapy in electronic media Peshawar 
written by Abdullah Abdullah, Haider Darain, Ayaz Uddin,  Shahid Ali, Babar Ali, In this article a 
cross-sectional survey was carried out and data was collected from 114 electronic media personnel of 
different TV channels of Peshawar. Data was analyzed through SPSS version 22. Results pf study 
shown that Overall, 57.96% of study population has sufficient knowledge regarding Physiotherapy. 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  12 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
Only 20.2% know that Physiotherapy is practiced by physiotherapists instead of other doctors like 
MBBS, BDS and MD etc. Interestingly 44.7% thought that physiotherapists are masseurs. Authors 
concluded  their study  as  “The  knowledge  about  Physiotherapy  is  not sufficient.  Awareness about 
Physiotherapy in electronic media personnel needs attention. Steps should be taken to improve and 
clarify the understanding about Physiotherapy.   
 
Another survey report that was published on 11 December 2019  which was conducted by Smruti 
Swagatika, Dash Narayana, Hrudayalaya Institute of Physiotherapy, Bangalore-560099, Karnataka, 
India  on  the  topic  awareness  of  physiotherapy  &  its  scope  among  women  in  a  community.  A 
community-based survey was carried out purely based on the questionnaire method which consist of 
sets of questions. Prior to the data collection the researcher explained about the study to the subject and 
an informed consent was obtained from them. The researcher gave the questionnaire form to the subject 
and was required to fill the frame. Results were that only 79% of respondents had awareness about 
physiotherapy but the awareness about scopes & scenarios in which women can actually benefit from 
physiotherapy was less. The result of the study indicated that women in city are still not completely 
aware of scopes of physiotherapy service. They just know it is a kind of health care service.  
 
Appropriate measures have to be taken to increase the awareness and create a good attitude towards the 
Physiotherapy profession.    
 
METHODOLOGY 
Study Sample  
The study interviewed 347 patients suffering from any type of joint pain consisted of [N=168] males 
and [N=179] females. The mean age of both male and females were [S.D = 39.6 ± 15.6]. Patients from 
the age of 18 and onwards were interviewed having education background from being illiterate to post-
Graduate studies. Patients were interviewed from different towns, streets, educational institutes as well 
as from different hospitals in Capital city of Baluchistan “Quetta”.  
 
Study Tool  
Interview schedule consisted of a two-page document involving three Parts with a total of 20 close 
ended questions. Patients were asked questions from their demographic history, Pain and motion history 
and Treatment history. The first part (demographic history) asked questions from patients age, weight, 
marital status, employment, education, ethnicity & residence followed by the second part (pain and 
motion history) which asked questions related to which joint is affected to aggravating and relieving 
factors with one question which had NRS (numerical rating scale) asking patient to rate their pain from 
a scale of 0 to 10. The third part (treatment history) included a series of question related to patients’ 
treatment, which included questions like whether they have ever heard about Physical Therapy, whether 
they think that Physical therapy is better than medication, the cost and nearby facility of Physical 
Therapy to how many sessions they were taking in a week.  
  
Study Procedure  
It was an observational study, with all interviews being taken by researchers. The procedure typically 
went as follows. The interviewer approached a random person and would ask that if they ever had or is 
having any type of joint pain, if the answer was Yes, then the interviewer would continue to ask some 
questions  related  to  questionnaire  and  subject  were  told  that  their  information  would  be  kept 
confidential, but the exact purpose of the interview was not revealed but they were asked to participate 
in a ”Health related survey”. a series of 20 close ended question were asked, the interview took only 5 
minutes to be completed.   
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  13 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
Study Duration  
The study was conducted in a total time frame of 6 months from October 12, 2021, to March 28, 2022.  
 
Study Eligibility Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria  
The people suffering from any type of joint pain were interviewed and were asked questions related to 
their pain and treatment history as well as personal information  
 
Exclusion criteria  
The people who never had any history of joint related pain or people who were not suffering from joint 
pain currently were not interviewed.  
 
Ethical consideration   
The study was conducted according to the ethical guidelines for human experimentations study has been 
approved by research committee from Department of Physical therapy, Faculty of Pharmacy. Verbal 
consent was taken from every participant prior to research  
  
Statistical Analysis  
The data were computed, and Descriptive analysis was performed using IBM statistical package for 
social science version 26 (IBM SPSS version 26). continuous data was presented as mean, median and 
standard deviations. To obtain final model of factors associated with awareness of physical therapy and 
consultation of physiotherapy scores, a p-value of <0.05 was considered statistically significant.  
  
Study Objective  
• To evaluate the awareness of Physical therapy among general population of Quetta, Balochistan.  
• To evaluate the percentage of joint pain patients seeking Physical therapy.    
 
DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
Socio-Demographic Characteristics Among Study Population  
Socio-demographic characteristics among study population are shown in Table  1. Majority of the 
interviewee  were  females  (51.6%),  mean  weight  and  age  of  both  genders  were  (69.7±13.2)  & 
(39.6±15.7) respectively. Similarly, majority of the interviewee were married (62.2%), unemployed 
(62.5%)  and  undergraduate  and  postgraduate  (30.3%)  and  (30.3%)  respectively.  Many  of  the 
interviewee belonged to Pashtun ethnicity (41.2%) and many of the interviewee were residence of urban 
areas (81.8%). 
Table 1: Socio-Demographic Characteristics Among Study Population 
Variables   Mean ± S. D   Number (%)  
Gender Males         
Females   168 (48.4)  
179 (51.6)  
Weight   69.7 ± 13.2     
Lightweight      44 (12.7) 
Underweight   167 (48.1)  
Heavyweight   123 (35.4)   
Obese   13 (3.7)  
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  14 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

| Variables    | Mean ± S. D   | Number (%)   |
|:-------------|:--------------|:-------------|
| Gender Males |               | 168 (48.4)   |
| Females      |               | 179 (51.6)   |
| Weight       | 69.7 ± 13.2   | 44 (12.7)    |
| Lightweight  |               | 167 (48.1)   |
| Underweight  |               | 123 (35.4)   |
| Heavyweight  |               | 13 (3.7)     |
| Obese        |               |              |

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
Age   39.6 ± 15.7      
18-38    190 (54.8)  
39-58   109 (31.4)  
59-78   42 (12.1) 6 
>79   (1.7)  
Marital Status        
Single   131 (37.8)  
Married   216 (62.2)  
Education        
Illiterate   66 (19)  
Matriculation   34 (9.8)  
FA/FSC   37 (10.7) 
Undergraduate   105 (30.3)  
Postgraduate   105 (30.3)  
Employment  Unemployed        
Employed   217 (62.5)  
130 (37.5)  
Ethnicity Pashtun        
Baloch   143 (41.2)  
Sindhi   70 (20.2)  
Punjabi   20 (5.8) 55 
Others   (15.9)  
59 (17.0)  
Residence         
Rural   63 (18.2) 
Urban   284 (81.8)  
 
Pain and Motion History Characteristics Among Study Population 
Total of thirteen (13) questioned were asked from the subjects related to their pain history and pain 
related activities which will be discussed below. 
 
History of Joint Pain Characteristics Among Study Population  
History of joint pain characteristics among study population is shown in Table  as study was conducted 
on subject who had joint pain. 
 
Table 5 History of Joint Pain Characteristics Among Study Population 
Question   Numbers    
Does the patients have any kind of joint pain?      347  
 
Joints Affected Characteristics Among Study Population  
Joints affected characteristics among study population are shown in table 6. In all of our 347 interviewee, 
knee joint (38.3%) was the most affected joint followed by back (33.1%) and then hip (6.3%), shoulder 
(6.1%), ankle (4.3%), wrist (3.5%) and other joints (8.4%) which includes elbow, MCP joints etc.   
 
 
 
 
Table 6 Joints Affected Characteristics Among Study Population 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  15 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

| Age                   | 39.6 ± 15.7   | 190 (54.8)    |
| 18-38                 |               | 109 (31.4)    |
| 39-58                 |               | 42 (12.1) 6   |
| 59-78                 |               | (1.7)         |
| >79                   |               |               |
|:----------------------|:--------------|:--------------|
| Marital Status        |               | 131 (37.8)    |
| Single                |               | 216 (62.2)    |
| Married               |               |               |
| Education             |               | 66 (19)       |
| Illiterate            |               | 34 (9.8)      |
| Matriculation         |               | 37 (10.7)     |
| FA/FSC                |               | 105 (30.3)    |
| Undergraduate         |               | 105 (30.3)    |
| Postgraduate          |               |               |
| Employment Unemployed |               | 217 (62.5)    |
| Employed              |               | 130 (37.5)    |
| Ethnicity Pashtun     |               | 143 (41.2)    |
| Baloch                |               | 70 (20.2)     |
| Sindhi                |               | 20 (5.8) 55   |
| Punjabi               |               | (15.9)        |
| Others                |               | 59 (17.0)     |
| Residence             |               | 63 (18.2)     |
| Rural                 |               | 284 (81.8)    |
| Urban                 |               |               |

| Question                                       |   Numbers |
|:-----------------------------------------------|----------:|
| Does the patients have any kind of joint pain? |       347 |

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
Question   Numbers (%)    
Which joint of these patients was affected the      
most?     
Back   115 (33.1)  
Knees   133 (38.3) 
Hip   22 (6.3)  
Shoulder   21 (6.1)  
Ankle   15 (4.3)  
Wrist   12 (3.5)  
Others   29 (8.4)  
 
Previous History Of Injury/Fracture Characteristics Among Study Population  
Previous history of the joint that is affected can be seen in Table 7. It can be seen that 214 (61.7%) of 
interviewee had no previous history of Fracture, injury and dislocation of the Joint that is affected.  
 
Table 7: Previous History of Injury/Fracture Characteristics Among Study Population 
 
Question   Number (%)    
Do these patients have any kind of previous     
history of     
Injury/Dislocation/Fracture of the joint 
  
effected?  
  
Yes   
133 (38.3)  
No  
214 (61.7)  
 
Pain Effecting Adl’s Characteristics Among Study Population  
It can be seen in Table 8 that (80.7%) interviewee answered that pain does not effect their activities that 
they do everyday. Meanwhile (19.3%) interviewee answered that pain effects their ADL’s.     
 
Table 8: Pain Effecting Adl’s Characteristics Among Study Population 
Question   Number (%)    
Does the activities that patients      
usually do every day is affected by    
pain? Yes   
  
No  
67 (19.3) 
280 (80.7)  
 
Pain Effecting Sleep Characteristics Among Study Population  
Pain effecting sleep characteristics among study population can be seen in Table 9. Interviewee’s sleep 
effected by pain were (52.4%), while (47.6%) interviewees had no issue in sleep due to pain.  
 
 
 
 
 
Table 9:  Pain Effecting Sleep Characteristics Among Study Population 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  16 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

| Question                                       | Numbers (%)   |
|:-----------------------------------------------|:--------------|
| Which joint of these patients was affected the | 115 (33.1)    |
| most?                                          | 133 (38.3)    |
| Back                                           | 22 (6.3)      |
| Knees                                          | 21 (6.1)      |
| Hip                                            | 15 (4.3)      |
| Shoulder                                       | 12 (3.5)      |
| Ankle                                          | 29 (8.4)      |
| Wrist                                          |               |
| Others                                         |               |

| Question                                    | Number (%)   |
|:--------------------------------------------|:-------------|
| Do these patients have any kind of previous | 133 (38.3)   |
| history of                                  | 214 (61.7)   |
| Injury/Dislocation/Fracture of the joint    |              |
| effected?                                   |              |
| Yes                                         |              |
| No                                          |              |

| Question                            | Number (%)   |
|:------------------------------------|:-------------|
| Does the activities that patients   | 67 (19.3)    |
| usually do every day is affected by | 280 (80.7)   |
| pain? Yes                           |              |
| No                                  |              |

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
 
Question   Number (%)    
Does sleep of patient is affected by pain?      
Yes     
No   182 (52.4)  
165 (47.6)  
 
Effect of Movement on Pain Among Study Population  
Effect of movement on pain among study population can be seen in Table 10 interviewee’s who had no 
pain during movement were (79.8%), while (20.2%) interviewees answered yes.  
  
Table 10: Effect of Movement on Pain Among Study Population 
 
Question   Number (%)    
Does Movement have effect on patient’s pain?      
Yes     
No   70 (20.2) 
277 (79.8)  
 
Type of Pain Characteristics Among Study Population  
The type of pain interviewee’s felt is shown in Table 11. it can be seen that dull pain (36.9%) was felt 
by interviewee’s followed, shooting pain (21.9%), tingling pain (21%) and burning pain (20.2%) were 
felt by patients respectively.   
  
Table 11: Type of Pain Characteristics Among Study Population 
Question   Number (%)    
What kind of pain was felt by the patient,      
describe?     
Burning   70 (20.2)  
Dull   128 (36.9)  
Shooting   76 (21.9) 73 
Tingling   (21)  
 
Prolong Use and Heavy Lifting Characteristics Among Study Population   
Table 12 below shows that heavy lifting or prolong use of joint causes pain or not. (82.7%) interviewees 
answered yes while, (17.3%) interviewees answered No.   
Table 12:Prolong Use and Heavy Lifting Characteristics Among Study Population 
Question   Number (%)    
Does prolong use and heavy lifting Increase in     
patients joint Pain?     
Yes   287 (82.7) 
No   60 (17.3)  
   
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  17 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

| Question                                   | Number (%)   |
|:-------------------------------------------|:-------------|
| Does sleep of patient is affected by pain? | 182 (52.4)   |
| Yes                                        | 165 (47.6)   |
| No                                         |              |

| Question                                     | Number (%)   |
|:---------------------------------------------|:-------------|
| Does Movement have effect on patient’s pain? | 70 (20.2)    |
| Yes                                          | 277 (79.8)   |
| No                                           |              |

| Question                                   | Number (%)   |
|:-------------------------------------------|:-------------|
| What kind of pain was felt by the patient, | 70 (20.2)    |
| describe?                                  | 128 (36.9)   |
| Burning                                    | 76 (21.9) 73 |
| Dull                                       | (21)         |
| Shooting                                   |              |
| Tingling                                   |              |

| Question                                       | Number (%)   |
|:-----------------------------------------------|:-------------|
| Does prolong use and heavy lifting Increase in | 287 (82.7)   |
| patients joint Pain?                           | 60 (17.3)    |
| Yes                                            |              |
| No                                             |              |

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
Pain Aggravating Characteristics Among Study Population  
The pain aggravating characteristics among study population can be seen in Table 13. it shows that 
ADL’s in  (73.5%) interviewees aggravates pain, meanwhile exercise and rest in (16.7%) and (9.8%) 
interviewees aggravates pain respectively.   
 
Table 13: Pain Aggravating Characteristics Among Study Population 
Question   Number (%)    
What Aggravates Patient’s pain the most?      
Rest     
Exercise   34 (9.8)  
Activities of Daily Living   58 (16.7) 
255 (73.5)  
  
Pain Relieving Characteristics Among Study Population  
The pain-relieving characteristics among study population can be seen in table 14. it can be seen that 
majority of the interviewee (34%), answered rest as relieving factor. Similarly, medication (32.9%) 
was  the  second  most  relieving  factor,  followed  by  exercise  (21%),  hot  and  cold  pack  (10.7%) 
respectively. Only (1.4%) Interviewee selected all of the above as pain-relieving factor.  
 
Table 14: Pain Relieving Characteristics Among Study Population 
Question   Number (%)    
What relieves patient’s pain the      
most? Rest     
Exercise   118 (34)  
Medication   73 (21)  
Hot & Cold Pack   114 (32.9)  
All of the above   37 (10.7) 5 
(1.4)  
   
Kind of Pain Characteristics Among Study Population  
Table  4.12  shows  the  kind  of  pain  interviewees  were  experiencing.(64.8%)  interviewees  were 
experiencing Intermittent (episodic) pain, while (35.2%) were experiencing constant pain.  
Table 15: Kind of Pain Characteristics Among Study Population 
Question   Number (%)    
What is the kind of pain pattern patients      
experiencing the most?     
Constant   122 (35.2) 
Intermittent   225 (64.8)  
       
Pain Intensity Characteristics Among Study Population  
The intensity of pain characteristic among study population can be seen in Table 16. it shows that 
(49.6%) interviewees were feeling moderate type of pain followed by severe type of pain and mild type 
of pain, (28.2%) and (22.2%) were felt by interviewees respectively.  
 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  18 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

| Question                                 | Number (%)   |
|:-----------------------------------------|:-------------|
| What Aggravates Patient’s pain the most? | 34 (9.8)     |
| Rest                                     | 58 (16.7)    |
| Exercise                                 | 255 (73.5)   |
| Activities of Daily Living               |              |

| Question                         | Number (%)   |
|:---------------------------------|:-------------|
| What relieves patient’s pain the | 118 (34)     |
| most? Rest                       | 73 (21)      |
| Exercise                         | 114 (32.9)   |
| Medication                       | 37 (10.7) 5  |
| Hot & Cold Pack                  | (1.4)        |
| All of the above                 |              |

| Question                                  | Number (%)   |
|:------------------------------------------|:-------------|
| What is the kind of pain pattern patients | 122 (35.2)   |
| experiencing the most?                    | 225 (64.8)   |
| Constant                                  |              |
| Intermittent                              |              |

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
Table 16: Pain Intensity Characteristics Among Study Population 
Question   Number (%)    
What was the intensity of the pain patients were      
feeling?     
Mild   77 (22.2)  
Moderate   172 (49.6) 
Severe   98 (28.2)  
  
Treatment History Characteristics Among Study Population  
Eight (8) questions were asked from patients related to their treatment history the results are discussed 
below.  
 
Physical Therapy Awareness Among Study Population   
Physical therapy awareness among study population can be seen on Table 4.13. out of 347 interviewees, 
(89.6%) were aware about Physical therapy while only  (10.4%) interviewees were not aware about 
Physical therapy.  
 
Table 17: Physical Therapy Awareness Among Study Population 
Question   Numbers (%)  
Have the patient ever heard about Physical    
therapy?     
Yes    311 (89.6) 
No   36 (10.4)  
            
Effect of Treatment Characteristics Among Study Population  
The most effective treatment according to interviewees can be seen in table 4.14. it is shown that 
(41.5%) interviewees thinks that both Physical therapy and medication are effective treatment. While 
(34.6%) interviewee thinks that Physical therapy is most effective and (16.7%) thinks that medication 
is better treatment. Only (7.2%) had no idea about treatment among physical therapy and medication.   
  
Table 18: Effect of Treatment Characteristics Among Study Population 
Question   Numbers (%)  
What does Patient think is the most effected    
Treatment?     
Physical Therapy   120 (34.6)  
Medication   58 (16.7)  
Both   144 (41.5) 
Don’t Know   25 (7.2)  
     
Facility and Cost Characteristics Among Study Population  
It can be seen in table 4.15 that (56.8%) interviewee had no Physical therapy facility nearby their 
residence, only (43.2%) had nearby facility of Physical Therapy.  
 
Those who had Physical therapy Facility nearby their residence were asked the cost of treatment. 
(32.3%) interviewees thinks that it was affordable, while (8.1%) interviewees thinks that cost was 
expensive, and (2.9%) interviewee thinks that it was cheap.  
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  19 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

| Question                                         | Number (%)   |
|:-------------------------------------------------|:-------------|
| What was the intensity of the pain patients were | 77 (22.2)    |
| feeling?                                         | 172 (49.6)   |
| Mild                                             | 98 (28.2)    |
| Moderate                                         |              |
| Severe                                           |              |

| Question                                   | Numbers (%)   |
|:-------------------------------------------|:--------------|
| Have the patient ever heard about Physical | 311 (89.6)    |
| therapy?                                   | 36 (10.4)     |
| Yes                                        |               |
| No                                         |               |

| Question                                     | Numbers (%)   |
|:---------------------------------------------|:--------------|
| What does Patient think is the most effected | 120 (34.6)    |
| Treatment?                                   | 58 (16.7)     |
| Physical Therapy                             | 144 (41.5)    |
| Medication                                   | 25 (7.2)      |
| Both                                         |               |
| Don’t Know                                   |               |

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
  
Table 19: Facility And Cost Characteristics Among Study Population 
Questions   Numbers (%)   
Do patients have Physical therapy facility      
nearby their residence?     
Yes    150 (43.2)  
No   197 (56.8)  
If they have Physical therapy facility      
nearby their residence, what is the cost?     
Cheap     
Affordable   10 (2.9)  
Expensive   112 (32.3) 
28 (8.1)  
  
Consultation and Response Characteristics Among Study Population  
The consultation from Physical therapist characteristic among study population is shown in Table 20. 
it can be seen that (38.9%) out of 347 interviewees have consulted a Physical therapist and only (55%) 
interviewee who consulted physical therapist answered that it was beneficial. meanwhile (61.1%) have 
never consulted a Physical therapist for themselves or for their family members.  
 
Table 20: Consultation and Response Characteristics Among Study Population 
Questions   Numbers (%)   
Have patients or any of their family member      
ever been to a physical therapist for    
treatment?     
Yes    135 (38.9)  
No   212 (61.1)  
If patients or their family member have been      
to a PT, was it beneficial?     
Yes    76 (55.6)  
No   59 (44.4)  
  
Sessions/Week Characteristics Among Study Population  
Sessions/week characteristic of physical therapy treatment are shown in Table 21. it can be seen that 
majority  of  the  interviewee  took  only  1  session  of  physical  therapy  (45.8%)  followed  by  6 
Sessions/week (17.9%), similarly 3 sessions/week and 2 session/week were as (11.8%) and (10.1%) 
respectively. followed by 5 sessions/week, 7 sessions/week and 4 sessions/week (5.5%), (5.2%) and 
(3.7%) respectively.  
 
Table 21 Sessions/Week Characteristics Among Study Population 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  20 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

| Questions                                  | Numbers (%)   |
|:-------------------------------------------|:--------------|
| Do patients have Physical therapy facility | 150 (43.2)    |
| nearby their residence?                    | 197 (56.8)    |
| Yes                                        |               |
| No                                         |               |
| If they have Physical therapy facility     | 10 (2.9)      |
| nearby their residence, what is the cost?  | 112 (32.3)    |
| Cheap                                      | 28 (8.1)      |
| Affordable                                 |               |
| Expensive                                  |               |

| Questions                                    | Numbers (%)   |
|:---------------------------------------------|:--------------|
| Have patients or any of their family member  | 135 (38.9)    |
| ever been to a physical therapist for        | 212 (61.1)    |
| treatment?                                   |               |
| Yes                                          |               |
| No                                           |               |
| If patients or their family member have been | 76 (55.6)     |
| to a PT, was it beneficial?                  | 59 (44.4)     |
| Yes                                          |               |
| No                                           |               |

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
Question   Numbers (%)    
How many sessions/per weeks were you or      
any of your family member seeking?     
(Sessions Per Week)     
1 Session     
2 Sessions   61 (45.8)  
14 (10.1)  
3 Sessions  
16 (11.8) 5 
4 Sessions  
(3.7)  
5 Sessions  
7 (5.5)  
6 Sessions  
24 (17.9) 7 
7 Sessions   (5.2)  
     
Recommendation of Assistive Device Characteristics Among Study Population  
Table 22 shows that (65.9%) of interviewee were recommended to use assistive or aiding devices for 
their joint pain, while remaining (34.1%) were not recommended to use any type of assistive or aiding 
devices.  
 
Table 22: Recommendation of Assistive Device Characteristics Among Study Population 
 
Question   Numbers (%)    
Does patient’s Physical therapist      
recommended them to use any aiding/    
assistive device?     
Yes   89 (65.9)  
No   46 (34.1)  
  
Cross-Tabulation of Subject’s Characteristics and Awareness    
Association of different variables with awareness about physical therapy can be seen in Table 23. both 
the genders were almost equally aware about physical therapy almost (90%). Similarly categorizing the 
Interviewee on the basis of weight all weight categories were aware about physical therapy with (100%) 
obese Interviewees were aware of physical therapy.  
 
On the basis of age Groups. Interviewees ranging between 59-78 years old were all aware of physical 
therapy (100%) showing significance. when compared to other age groups on the basis of marital status 
both married and single were equally (90%) aware of physical therapy.  
 
On the basis of education, 90% from every education category (matriculation to post graduate) were 
aware  of  Physical  therapy  showing  significance  in  association  On  the  basis  of  employment  both 
employed (94.6%) and unemployed (86.7%) interviewee’s were aware about PT but on the basis of 
ethnicity Punjabi’s (96.4%) had knowledge related physical therapy.  
 
On the basis of residence, interviewees living in urban areas (90.5%) were aware about physical therapy 
than interviewees living in rural areas education showing great significance (p-value=0.000), followed 
by Age  (p-value=0.013) and Employment (p-value=0.018)    
     
 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  21 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

| Question                                | Numbers (%)   |
|:----------------------------------------|:--------------|
| How many sessions/per weeks were you or | 61 (45.8)     |
| any of your family member seeking?      | 14 (10.1)     |
| (Sessions Per Week)                     | 16 (11.8) 5   |
| 1 Session                               | (3.7)         |
| 2 Sessions                              | 7 (5.5)       |
| 3 Sessions                              | 24 (17.9) 7   |
| 4 Sessions                              | (5.2)         |
| 5 Sessions                              |               |
| 6 Sessions                              |               |
| 7 Sessions                              |               |

| Question                            | Numbers (%)   |
|:------------------------------------|:--------------|
| Does patient’s Physical therapist   | 89 (65.9)     |
| recommended them to use any aiding/ | 46 (34.1)     |
| assistive device?                   |               |
| Yes                                 |               |
| No                                  |               |

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
Table 23: Cross-Tabulation of Subject’s Characteristics And Awareness 
 
Variables   Awareness about   p-value  
Physical Therapy  
Number (%)  
No                             Yes  
Gender Males      0.880  
Females   17 (10.1)                151(89.9) 19 
(10.6)                160(89.4)  
Weight/kg      0.598  
Lightweight (35-54)   3 (6.8)                      41(93.2)  
Underweight (55-74)   18 (10.8)     149(89.2) 15(12.2)     
Heavyweight (75-94) Obese  108(87.8)  
(95>)   0 (0.0)                  13(100.0)  
Age      0.013  
18-38    18 (9.5)                  172(90.5)  
39-58   17 (15.6)                  92(84.4) 0 
59-78   (0.0)                      42(100)  
>79   1 (16.7)                      5(83.3)  
Marital Status      0.882  
Single   14(10.7)                 117(89.3) 22 
Married   (10.2)                194(89.8)  
Education      0.000  
Illiterate   17 (25.8)                  49(74.2) 3 
Matriculation   (8.8)                      31(91.2) 1 (2.7)                      
FA/FSC   36(97.3)  13  (12.4)                  
Undergraduate   92(87.6)  
Postgraduate   2 (1.9)                    103(98.1)   
Employment  Unemployed      0.018  
Employed   29 (13.4)                188(86.7) 7    
(5.4)                    123(94.6)  
Ethnicity Pashtun      0.088  
Baloch   20 (14.0)                123(86.0) 9 
Punjabi   (12.9)                    61(87.1) 2 (3.6)                      
Others   53(96.4)  5  (6.3)                      
74(93.7)  
Residence      0.260  
Rural   9 (14.3)                    54(85.7) 27    
Urban   (9.5)                  257(90.5)  
     
Cross-Tabulation of Subject’s Characteristics With Pt Consultation   
The Association of different variables with consultation of physical therapy is shown in Table 24. on 
the basis of gender both males (63.7%) and females (58.7%) consulted Physical therapist for the 
treatment. On the basis of weight group every weight group had high consultation rate with obese group 
(76.9%) having slightly more consultation percentage.   
 
On the basis of age group every age group had high consultation rate with interviewees aging 79 or 
above having (83.3%) consultation rate.   
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  22 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

| Variables                 | Awareness about              |   p-value |
|                           | Physical Therapy             |           |
|                           | Number (%)                   |           |
|                           | No Yes                       |           |
|:--------------------------|:-----------------------------|----------:|
| Gender Males              | 17 (10.1) 151(89.9) 19       |     0.88  |
| Females                   | (10.6) 160(89.4)             |           |
| Weight/kg                 | 3 (6.8) 41(93.2)             |     0.598 |
| Lightweight (35-54)       | 18 (10.8) 149(89.2) 15(12.2) |           |
| Underweight (55-74)       | 108(87.8)                    |           |
| Heavyweight (75-94) Obese | 0 (0.0) 13(100.0)            |           |
| (95>)                     |                              |           |
| Age                       | 18 (9.5) 172(90.5)           |     0.013 |
| 18-38                     | 17 (15.6) 92(84.4) 0         |           |
| 39-58                     | (0.0) 42(100)                |           |
| 59-78                     | 1 (16.7) 5(83.3)             |           |
| >79                       |                              |           |
| Marital Status            | 14(10.7) 117(89.3) 22        |     0.882 |
| Single                    | (10.2) 194(89.8)             |           |
| Married                   |                              |           |
| Education                 | 17 (25.8) 49(74.2) 3         |     0     |
| Illiterate                | (8.8) 31(91.2) 1 (2.7)       |           |
| Matriculation             | 36(97.3) 13 (12.4)           |           |
| FA/FSC                    | 92(87.6)                     |           |
| Undergraduate             | 2 (1.9) 103(98.1)            |           |
| Postgraduate              |                              |           |
| Employment Unemployed     | 29 (13.4) 188(86.7) 7        |     0.018 |
| Employed                  | (5.4) 123(94.6)              |           |
| Ethnicity Pashtun         | 20 (14.0) 123(86.0) 9        |     0.088 |
| Baloch                    | (12.9) 61(87.1) 2 (3.6)      |           |
| Punjabi                   | 53(96.4) 5 (6.3)             |           |
| Others                    | 74(93.7)                     |           |
| Residence                 | 9 (14.3) 54(85.7) 27         |     0.26  |
| Rural                     | (9.5) 257(90.5)              |           |
| Urban                     |                              |           |

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
On the basis of marital status, married interviewees had a slightly better treatment consultation from 
Physical therapist than unmarried interviewees. On the basis of education every category had a good 
consultation percentage with interviewees from FA/FSC and postgraduate leading with (75.7%) and 
(70.5%) consultation percentage respectively.   
 
On the basis of ethnicity Pashtun and Punjabi interviewees had high percentage of (67.8%) and (74.5%) 
of consultation rate among them respectively.  
 
On the basis of residence living in urban and rural areas, interviewees living in rural areas had high 
consultation rate (65.1%) than interviewees living in urban areas. ethnicity showing great significance 
(p-value=0.002), followed by education   
 
(p-value=0.005), followed by age (p-value=0.029) and employment (p-value=0.029)    
              
Table 24: Cross-Tabulation of Subject’s Characteristics With PT Consultation 
 
Variables   Consultation of   P value  
Physiotherapist  
Number (%)  
No                                Yes  
Gender Males      0.337  
Females   61 (36.3)       
      107(63.7)        
74 (41.3)  
105(58.7)  
Weight/kg      0.290  
Lightweight (35-54)   22 (50.0)  
        22(50.0)       
Underweight (55-74)   62 (37.1)  
105(62.9)         
Heavyweight (75-94) Obese  48 (39.0)  
75(61.0)         
(95>)      3 (23.1)  
10(76.9)  
Age      0.029  
18-38    72 (37.9)  
      118(62.1)         
39-58   52 (47.7)  
57(52.3)  
59-78   10 (23.8)  
        32(76.2)           
>79     1 (16.7)       
5(83.3)  
Marital Status      0.170  
Single   57 (43.5) 78 
        74(56.5)  
Married   (36.1)  
      138(63.9)  
Education      0.005  
Illiterate   29 (43.9)           37(56.1)  
Matriculation FA/FSC   12 (35.3)           22(64.7)  
Undergraduate     9 (24.3)                   28(75.7)  
Postgraduate   54 (51.4)           51(48.6) 31 
(29.5)           74(70.5)  
Employment  Unemployed      0.029  
Employed   94 (43.3)                 123(56.7)  
41 (31.5)           89(68.5)  
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  23 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

| Variables                 | Consultation of       |   P value |
|                           | Physiotherapist       |           |
|                           | Number (%)            |           |
|                           | No Yes                |           |
|:--------------------------|:----------------------|----------:|
| Gender Males              | 61 (36.3)             |     0.337 |
| Females                   | 107(63.7)             |           |
|                           | 74 (41.3)             |           |
|                           | 105(58.7)             |           |
| Weight/kg                 | 22 (50.0)             |     0.29  |
| Lightweight (35-54)       | 22(50.0)              |           |
| Underweight (55-74)       | 62 (37.1)             |           |
| Heavyweight (75-94) Obese | 105(62.9)             |           |
| (95>)                     | 48 (39.0)             |           |
|                           | 75(61.0)              |           |
|                           | 3 (23.1)              |           |
|                           | 10(76.9)              |           |
| Age                       | 72 (37.9)             |     0.029 |
| 18-38                     | 118(62.1)             |           |
| 39-58                     | 52 (47.7)             |           |
| 59-78                     | 57(52.3)              |           |
| >79                       | 10 (23.8)             |           |
|                           | 32(76.2)              |           |
|                           | 1 (16.7)              |           |
|                           | 5(83.3)               |           |
| Marital Status            | 57 (43.5) 78          |     0.17  |
| Single                    | 74(56.5)              |           |
| Married                   | (36.1)                |           |
|                           | 138(63.9)             |           |
| Education                 | 29 (43.9) 37(56.1)    |     0.005 |
| Illiterate                | 12 (35.3) 22(64.7)    |           |
| Matriculation FA/FSC      | 9 (24.3) 28(75.7)     |           |
| Undergraduate             | 54 (51.4) 51(48.6) 31 |           |
| Postgraduate              | (29.5) 74(70.5)       |           |
| Employment Unemployed     | 94 (43.3) 123(56.7)   |     0.029 |
| Employed                  | 41 (31.5) 89(68.5)    |           |

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
Ethnicity Pashtun      0.002  
Baloch   46 (32.2)           97(67.8)  
Punjabi   36 (51.4)           34(48.6)  
Others   14 (25.5)           41(74.5)  
39 (49.4)                   40(50.6)  
Residence      0.473  
Rural   22 (34.9)         41(65.1) 113 (39.8)       
Urban   171(60.2)  
 
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
To the best of our knowledge this is first study in Baluchistan which evaluated the awareness of Physical 
therapy  among  general  population  of  Quetta  city  as  well  as  the  percentage  of  Physical  therapy 
consultation among joint pain patients. This chapter is comprised of the significant findings of the 
current  study  regarding  the  sociodemographics  and  awareness  PT  among  study  participants,  and 
proportion of joint pain in study population seeking PT for their treatment.  
as we know that Physical therapy is among one of the most reliable and significant in treatment of many 
health related issues, and for Physical therapy to come in handy among population, awareness of such 
profession is one of the biggest challenge that any health care provider or profession as a whole can 
face.   
 
Awareness of Physical Therapy  
Association  of  different  socio-demographic  characteristic  of  Quetta’s  general  population  with 
awareness about PT will be discussed primarily. in current study it was evaluated that among the 
interviewees’ (89.6%) were aware of physical therapy in which most were females. It was seen in our 
study that variables which shows significance (p-value=<0.5) were Age, Education and Employment.   
it was evaluated that in age, the interviewees between the age of 59 – 78 were all aware of physical 
therapy as it is the age where many physical activities among population becomes less and they start 
having complications especially in joints, such as O.A and R.A, weakened joints due to lack of proper 
diet. Calcium and vitamin D deficiency is peak between this age. Age group was significant in current 
study as it had (p-value = 0,013).  
 
furthermore,  it  was  evaluated  that  among  the  Education  the  most  aware  education  group  was  of 
interviewees who were currently or had done their post-graduate studies (N=105) out of which 98.1% 
were aware about physical therapy because in higher studies the more educated you become and the 
more knowledge you get the more you take care of your health, the more the health is taken care of the 
more people rely on exercises for many health related issues and physical therapy is the most reliable 
one. education was also significant in our study as it had a (p-value=0.000).  
Moreover, among the employed and unemployed interviewees the more aware about Physical therapy 
were employed subjects (94.6%), as employment is directly proportion to education e.g. the more the 
educated, the better the chances of employment. It had a (p-value=0.018), thus showing significance.  
 
Consultation of Physical Therapy  
Association  of  socio-demographic  characteristic  among  the  study  population  with  consultation  of 
physical therapy is discussed, it was seen the variables that showed significance in out study when it 
comes to consultation were Age, Education, Employment and Ethnicity. Within the age, interviewees 
equal to or above the age of 79 were consulting a PT for treatment (83.3%), it can be discussed that at 
this age due to lack of physical activity people tend to have more joint related issues and due to increased 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  24 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

| Ethnicity Pashtun   | 46 (32.2) 97(67.8)            |   0.002 |
| Baloch              | 36 (51.4) 34(48.6)            |         |
| Punjabi             | 14 (25.5) 41(74.5)            |         |
| Others              | 39 (49.4) 40(50.6)            |         |
|:--------------------|:------------------------------|--------:|
| Residence           | 22 (34.9) 41(65.1) 113 (39.8) |   0.473 |
| Rural               | 171(60.2)                     |         |
| Urban               |                               |         |

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
side effects of medicine they rely on exercise therapy or Physical therapy for the treatment. Age had a 
significance in this current study having (p-value=0.029). when it comes to education, the group that 
consulted PT for treatment were interviewees going to FA/FSC or High School (75.7%) and the reason 
for that is at this age Physical activity among the population is on its peak, sports related participation 
is  major  priority  for  many  people  at  this  age  or  belonging  from  FA/FSC  education  group,  and 
consumption of medication for treatment is lowest among all the age groups in FA/FSC. Education 
having significance in current study  (p-value=0.005). furthermore, interviewees among employment 
showed a significance of  (p-value=0.029). Most of the interviewees consulting PT for the treatment 
were employed (68.5%), more the money, more the affordability of Physical therapy as one session of 
PT in Pakistan costs between 500rs to 1500rs depending on the city and reliability of PT’s.   
 
Quetta being one of the diverse cities in Balochistan, a lot of ethnic groups lives in this city with Punjabi 
and Pashtun people among the educated ones. The more the educated the more you rely on Physical 
therapy as people learn more about importance of physical therapy or physical activity in their daily 
life, .e.g., people who start their day by a morning walk tend to have less mobility related issues in their 
daily life. In the current study interviewees belonging to ethnic group of Punjabi (74.5%) consulted PT 
for treatment. Ethnicity showed a significance in current study when it comes to PT consultation (p-
value=0.002)  
  
Conclusion   
Physical therapy as a growing profession in Balochistan needs a lot of recognition among the population 
of Baluchistan. The more the people are aware of the benefits of Physical therapy throughout their lives 
the more people will consult a Physical therapist for treatment of many health-related problems with 
Joint pain being the major problem. This can be easily overcome by doing Physical therapy awareness 
campaigns especially in Geriatric care. Ad’s related to PT on social media as well as on billboards are 
a must to get people aware of physical therapy benefits. Screening campaigns about physical therapy in 
different educational institutes to cover all major age groups as well as education groups. This all should 
be done so that people can take advantage of Physical therapy in preventing, improving and maintaining 
their lifestyle.  
 
Study limitations  
Cross-sectional design and being a study from a single center are the major limitations associated with 
the  current  study,  so  its  results  could  not  be  generalized.  A  multi-center  study  with  large  study 
participants is recommended to confirm the findings of the current study. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
  Kooijman, M., et al. (2013). "Patients with shoulder syndromes in general and physiotherapy 
practice: an observational study." BMC Musculoskeletal Disorders  
  
 Stefane, P., et al. (2021). "Self-referral to physiotherapy in older adults: findings from the 
European Health Interview Survey." European Journal of Physiotherapy: 1-6.  
  
 Ahmad, Z. and Z. Shah (2021). "Awareness of physical therapy among medical doctors in 
Swabi." Rehman Journal of Health Sciences 3(1): 43-47.  
  
  Abdullah,  Abdullah,  Darain,  H.  Uddin,  A.,  Ali,  S.,  &  Ali,  B.  (2019).  Awareness  of 
physiotherapy in electronic media Peshawar. Annals of Allied Health Sciences, 5(1), 14-19  
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  25 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)

Logical Creations Education Research Institute 
MADER E MILAT INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL 
OF NURSING AND ALLIED SCIENCES
 
E-ISSN: 2960-2181 
Web: www.minasij.com | Email: editor@minasij.com 
Volume-01 | Issue-04 | December-2023 
 
  
 Maruf, F., et al. (2012). "Awareness, Belief, Attitude and Utilization of Physiotherapy Services 
in a Nigerian Population." Journal of the Nigeria Society of Physiotherapy 20: 26-34.  
  
 Dissanayaka, T. and S. Banneheka (2014). "Awareness in Physiotherapy among High School 
Students." International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications 4.  
  
 Ameer  Shaikh,  H.,  et  al.  (2019).  "Physiotherapy  Awareness  Among  Community  Health 
workers-A Survey." International Journal of Scientific and Engineering Research 10: 646-650.  
  
 Devanshi Doshi, Mariya Jiandani, Rucha Gadgil, Neha Shetty. physiotherapy awareness in 
medical and non-medical population: a social media survey. Int J Physiotherapy Res 2017;5(2):1971-
1975. DOI: 10.16965/ijpr.2017.119  
  
Smruti  Swagatika  Dash.  awareness  of  physiotherapy  &  its  scope  among  women  in  a 
community- a survey. Int J Physiotherapy Res 2019;7(6):3331-3335. DOI: 10.16965/ijpr.2019.198  
  
  
 
 
Published by Logical Creations Education Research Institute. www.lceri.net  26 
 
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0)