Observational and Theoretical study of the
inner region of HH 30
Phd thesis
5102 nuJ 2  ]PE.hp-ortsa[  1v40010.6051:viXra
Author: Maria Carolina Duran Rojas
Thesis Advisor: Alan Watson
Abstract
The theory of low mass young stellar formation establish that they form because
of the gravitational contraction of the molecular cloud. The cocoons, where stars will
form, rotate. This rotation causes the formation of a keplerian disk around the star. The
disk is composed of gas and dust. Observationally, in the optical and near infrared wa-
velengths, is very easy to see sources with edge-on disks, because they are optically
thick and veil the light from the star. The images of edge-on disks consist of the scat-
tered starlight by the dust in the disk in the infrared. On the other hand, in the optical
wavelengths, is more complicated to observe sources with a disk that is parallel to the
plane of the sky because we are looking directly at the star.
HH 30 is a classical T Tauri star that has been extensively studied during the last
two decades. Hubble Space Telescope (HST) observations reveal the existence of a va-
riability in the external disk illumination, this is the result of the starlight scattered by
the dust in the disk. In this study our goal is to determine the period or periods of the
variability or better constrain the time scale of a period. For example, photometric stu-
dies of the outer disk variability in HH 30 indicate that this periods must be less than 6
months, some other suggest that they must be less than 300 days. It is importantto note
that depending on the period scale, the variability should related with the star or with
thedisk.The mechanismsrelatedwith shortperiodsareconnectedwiththephotosphere
orregionsclosetothestar,however,mechanismslinkedwithlongperiodsarerelatedto
asymmetriesin the innerparts oftheaccretiondisk.Previousphotometricstudiesof the
outer disk variability in HH 30 indicate that this periods must be less than 6 months. It
is important to note that the period may indicate whether the variability should related
with the star or with the disk. The mechanismsrelated with short periods are connected
with the photosphere or regions close to the star. However, mechanisms linked with
long periods are likely to be asymmetries in the inner parts of the accretion disk. To
fulfill our goal, we made an observational and theoretical analysis of HH 30. At first
we obtained direct photopolarimetricimages with a the 84 cm of National Observatory
of Mexico located at San Pedro Martir (OAN-SPM). We obtained images of the object
in four different positions of the analyzing prism. This different positions allow us to
determine the normalizedStokes parameters q and u, which reveal variability. We tried
to measure the photomeric variability, howeverthis was not periodic.
A method used to determine periods is called the Lomb-Scargle normalized pe-
riodogram, which calculates a power spectral density, that depends on the observable
quantities like the magnitudeand the observationtime. We appliedthis methodto three
1

sets of photometric data, but we do not find a variability period of the source. It drives
us to look for a different way to mitigate short time correlations effects, which consist
of binning the sets of data in a 1/8 of the period that we want to test. We calculated the
Lomb-Scargle periodogram of the polarimetric data and we found a variability period
of 7.5 days. The level of significance of this polarimetric period was high whereas the
significance of the same period in the photometry was lower. However, we found that
both periods are consistent, and have a particular characteristic, that the sin fit of pho-
tometric variability is displaced by a quarter of the sin fit of polarimetric variability.
That means that the photometric component shows a minimum or a maximum when
the polarimetric component is null.
Different mechanisms have been suggested to explain the variable asymmetry, in-
cluding mechanisms that are directly linked to the star and mechanisms that are not.
In the first place, in the photosphere there are hot spots that are produced by the shock
of material from the disk. In the other hand, they are mechanisms that are related with
asymmetries in the inner disk or a close companion like a brown dwarf or a big planet.
Our result that sin fits of photometric and polarimetric variability are displaced by a
quarter in between are in agreement to the mechanisms related directly to the star, like
the hot spots. A model proposed to explain the variability is the lighthouse model. This
model consists of a beam or a shadow from the central source that has an azimuthal
movement that sweep the full disk. The mechanism proposed for the lighthouse mo-
del are, the none symmetric accretion producedby hot spots, and clumps or gaps in the
disk. Unfortunately,howeverwe determinea variabilityperiodwe were not able to dis-
tinguish between the mechanisms but our observations provide quantitative constrains
of the period and in the photometric and polarimetric modulation amplitude.
We show that one of the mechanisms proposed to explain the variability for HH 30
can reproduce our polarimetric observations. One model include a low mass (2 solar
masses) star with hot spots in its photosphere and a flared optically thick disk round
the source. We obtained the intensity of HH 30 with the radiative transfer code of
Watson y Henney (2001) that includes polarization. We used the parameters of Wood
y Whitney (1998) to calculate the polarimetric variability. The important parameters
of that model for the source are mass, radius and temperature, mass, size, inclination,
flaring, the exponent of the density power-law, size, altitude and brightness of the hot
spots, the phase function for scattering of Henyey-Greenstein, albedo and opacity for
the dust. We discussed these parameters and suggest a model that can reproduce our
polarimetric observations.
2