AWS Serverless Airline Booking
Serverless Airline Booking is a complete web application that provides Flight Search, Payment, Book‑
ing and Loyalty points including end‑to‑end testing, GraphQL and CI/CD. This web application was
the theme of Build on Serverless Season 2 on AWS Twitch running from April 24th until August 7th ‑
Check out Twitch branch for the list of 14 episodes.
For more up‑to‑date information on what’s being implemented, take a look at our current Boards.
Note
This project is no longer being worked on. This branch repo only serves to give inspiration to
othersasapointintimereference,youcanseetheformercodebyviewingthearchivebranch
Deployment
TogetstartedwiththeServerlessAirlineapplication,youcandeployintoyourAWSAccountbyfollow‑
ing our Get Started instructions
Stack
Summary of what the stack looks like now including a picture with the core tech:
• Front‑end ‑ Vue.js as the core framework, Quasar for UI, Amplify for Auth UI component and
AWS integration, and Stripe JS with Stripe Elements for card tokenization, validation, etc.
1

• Data ‑All datais modeled afterGraphQLtypesand storedin DynamoDB. Python being thecore
languageforallservicesexceptLoyaltythat’swritteninTypescript,andJavaScriptforfront‑end.
• API‑GraphQLismanagedbyAppSyncandalsoactsasanAPIHubtointeractwithotherservices.
Loyalty implements a REST API to demonstrate how to secure service‑to‑service communica‑
tion while maintaining a public endpoint. Payment API is also based on REST to demonstrate
an external payment provider.
• Auth ‑ Cognito provides JSON Web Tokens (JWT) and along with AppSync fine‑grained autho‑
rization on what data types users can access.
• Messaging ‑ Booking workflow is managed by Step Functions while SNS provides service‑to‑
service communication through messaging between Booking and Loyalty.
Back‑end
Back‑end services that makes up the Serverless Airline functionalities as of now:
Service Language Description
Catalog Apache VTL Provides Flight search. CRUD operations
including custom indexes are
auto‑generated by Amplify
2

Service Language Description
Booking Python and Apache VTL Provides new and list Bookings. CRUD
operations including custom indexes are
auto‑generated by Amplify. Business
workflow is implemented in Python.
Payment YAML and Python Provides payment authorization,
collection and refund. Bulk of Payment
integration with Stripe is done via a
Serverless Application Repository App.
Payment collection and refund operations
within Booking business workflow are in
Python
Loyalty Typescript Provides Loyalty points for customers
including tiers. Fetching and ingesting
Loyalty points are implemented in
Typescript.
Front‑end
See more information about our Front‑end, components, routing and convention
High level infrastructure architecture
3

License Summary
This sample code is made available under the MIT‑0 license. See the LICENSE file.
4